Title: H.M._Dronning_Marys_tale_ved_Global_Fashion_Summit
Date: 2024-05-22
Talegenre: Åbningstale


Fifteen years ago, I attended the Global Fashion Summit for the first time. In my opening address, I characterized the fashion industry as one that reflects and inspires societal development. And although the world has changed dramatically since then, this characterization still holds true.
Today, many industries, including the fashion and textile industry, are increasingly focused on sustainability and circularity. By mobilizing fashion leaders and partnerships worldwide, Global Fashion Agenda has been, and continues to be, a driving force in the crucial development and future proofing of the industry.
I am delighted to support this year’s call to ‘unlock the next level’. I believe this annual Summit plays a key role in accelerating the journey towards a
regenerative industry. Visionary partnerships, innovative ideas, and concrete examples of sustainable win-win solutions are presented here year after year inspiring stakeholders all over the world.
I look forward to visiting the Innovation Forum shortly to learn more about the wonders of seaweed as an alternative to existing fabrics, the latest steps towards textile-to-textile recycling, and all the other inspiring examples of planet positive initiatives that have emerged since last year.
Our planet is beautiful but fragile. We have a responsibility to protect and preserve it for the sake of our children and future generations, ensuring that they too can wonder in its beauty and bounty.
As you may know, I am the proud mother of four children, two boys and two girls. Today, Isabella and Josephine can fit many of my clothes and, to my horror, shoes. The age gap, however, often means that they ‘wouldn’t be caught dead in that’. However, when they will be seen in something of mine, it always puts a smile on my face.
My children are far from the only ones borrowing and swapping clothes, frequenting vintage stores and flea markets. New clothing is no longer seen in opposition to used clothing. Along with progress in sustainable production, the
development of new materials and textiles, and scaling of textile recycling, this bodes well for future circularity.
The Global Fashion Summit is an important catalyst.
With that in mind, I would like to share a saying: “If you can imagine it, you can make it happen”.
So, let’s all imagine a fashion industry, that gives more than it takes from people and planet.
Thank you!

