Title: H.M._Kong_Frederik_X's_tale_ved_erhvervskonference_og_lancering_af_dansk-egyptisk_handelsforum
Date: 2024-12-06
Organisationer og bevægelser: Kongehuset
Talegenre: Åbningstale


Your Excellency, Ministers, ladies and gentlemen – good afternoon.
It is a great pleasure to welcome you to Denmark. Today marks the opening of the first Danish-Egyptian Business Forum. This conference aims to enhance Business-to-Business communication, strengthen ties, and explore new trade and investment opportunities in our countries.
Egypt is a country that has always been alluring to us in the north with its rich culture, magnificent history and welcoming people. Since ancient times, bold sailors and traders have embarked on daring voyages to reach the shores of Egypt.
In more recent years – and with far less dependence on the whims of nature – Danish maritime and healthcare companies have successfully established a presence in Egypt.
Egypt continues to serve as both a vital partner for Denmark and a gateway to the African continent and beyond. The business opportunities in Egypt align seamlessly with the expertise of Danish companies, making our collaboration more relevant than ever before.
Together, our nations have the potential to lead the way when it comes to green transition by introducing and integrating sustainable technologies and energy solutions into our societies.
Some of the Danish companies represented here today are already deeply embedded in the Egyptian market, others are just beginning their journey, while some are still evaluating their entry.
The launch of the Danish-Egyptian Business Forum provides an invaluable platform to deepen our partnership across all levels.
By working together, we can unlock new opportunities, drive innovation, and pave the way for sustainable growth that will benefit generations to come.
In a sense, we are building a new “canal” between our countries – one that connects us to a brighter and more prosperous future.
I wish you all a successful and productive day.
Thank you.

