Title: H.M._Kong_Frederik_X's_tale_ved_abningsceremonien_for_Danmarksdagen_pa_Expo_2025_Osaka,_Kansai,_Japan
Date: 2025-04-24
Talegenre: Åbningstale


Your Excellencies, Ministers, ladies and gentlemen,
Today marks the culmination of Denmark’s participation in EXPO 2025. Months of dedicated work, in close cooperation with our Nordic neighbours – Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden – have resulted in this remarkable joint Nordic contribution here in Osaka.
I had the pleasure of visiting Japan’s previous EXPO twenty years ago.
For more than 150 years, world expositions have inspired and captivated audiences with their international atmosphere and progressive and optimistic visions of the future. EXPOs are enablers of mutual understanding and cultural exchange essential for future global cooperation and are as vital today as ever.
When I reflect on the relationship between Denmark and Japan, I see a long-standing partnership grounded in mutual respect and values. Our diplomatic ties go back 158 years.
In our time, we share a profound commitment to innovation, sustainability, and quality of life – values that lie at the heart of this year’s EXPO theme, "Designing Future Society for Our Lives".
At the Nordic Pavilion, visitors will discover how trust and collaboration form the foundation of our ambition to become the world’s most integrated and sustainable region. Danish companies and institutions will showcase how we design green cities, build circular economy, and develop innovative solutions that enhance quality of life.
We are proud to share our experiences and continuously seek inspiration from beyond our borders. Take timeless Danish handcrafted furniture, for instance – designed decades ago, yet deeply influenced by the profound Japanese aesthetics, simplicity, and reverence for natural materials.
I hope that all visitors to the Nordic Pavilion leave feeling inspired with a deeper understanding of how Denmark and the other Nordic countries are working to create a better future for the generations to come.
Enjoy the day – and take with you a sense of what Denmark has to offer.
Thank you.

