Title: H.M._Dronning_Marys_tale_ved_reception_i_Royal_Botanical_Garden
Date: 2026-03-18
Talegenre: Festtale
Organisationer og bevægelser: Kongehuset


Wow, what an introduction.
It means a great deal for me to speak at this gathering of Australians and Danes who share common interests and ambitions.  It is very easy to have a foot in each camp tonight!
It will be interesting to hear when mingling a little later; if I still have my Aussie accent or speak English with a Danish accent.
I’ve been here a few days now and previous experience has shown that my Australian accent and word choice get better with each conversation.
Melbourne is a great city, and the Royal Botanic Gardens boast a beautiful and diverse nature close to its centre.
I used to live in South Yarra, just off Toorak Road making this park my backyard. Personally, I think the choice of venue for this evening is just right!
One may think that two countries so geographically far apart – with different climates, landscapes, histories, languages and cultures – would see things very differently.
From my perspective – and I find it quite fascinating – I see two societies that are remarkably alike. And you can imagine that was a huge relief to learn as I’d already fallen for Denmark’s Crown Prince.
Both our countries believe in democracy, in gender equality and social equity.
We are environmentally aware and share a deep respect for and love of nature.
We share a strong commitment to welfare and understand the importance of community.
We have an eye for those who are vulnerable and extend a helping hand.
We value work-life balance, and we recognize that our physical and mental health are closely connected.
We generally say what we mean and do what we say, unless we are being sarcastic, which is often the case in both Danish and Australian humour.
We don’t take ourselves too seriously and getting ahead of yourself is frowned upon. In Denmark, we call it “janteloven”. In Australia, the tall poppy syndrome.
This common ground forms a solid foundation for collaboration. And that is precisely why we are here.
Frederik and I are delighted that such a strong Danish business delegation has travelled all this way to meet their Australian counterparts – to strengthen existing partnerships and explore new ones, all in pursuit of a noble but also profitable ambition of a greener, more secure and sustainable future.
Yesterday, we visited the iconic social housing towers here in Melbourne and learned how Danish expertise in retrofit solutions can help address a fundamental question: whether to demolish and rebuild – or upgrade existing structures with new technology and the re-use of existing materials.
Tomorrow, we will be introduced to one of three Australian built battery-electric ferries that will soon provide a green link between Danish regions.
There is no doubt that the world as we knew it has changed.
In challenging and uncertain times like these, you turn to your trusted partners and friends. And Denmark and Australia are both.
That is why this State Visit comes at such an opportune time. Not only do we have much to learn from one another, we also share a common vision for the future.
All these commonalities connect us. One thing we do not share, however, is language. And Danish is not a language one simply picks up. With give or take only six million people in the world speaking Danish, mastering English has been a good strategy.
While the Viking ancestors plundered and pillaged with success, today’s Danes, lucky for you, are more about trading and collaboration through strong and equal partnerships.
So, language is not a barrier. However, some Danes may struggle with the more colloquial or slang Australian language.
The Danish language is difficult to hear. For example, when a sentence starts or stops or even a word for that matter. And we like to join an unimaginable number of words together to form a term.
“Speciallægepraksisplanlægningsstabiliserings-periode” – that is 51 letters!
And then there are words like “bidrag” and “bedrag”. The first means “contribution”, the second means “fraud”. It is all about which syllable you stress.
Could you hear the difference? A little difference with big problem potential.
And to the Danes: if you’re sitting across from a new business partner and in conclusion they say; ‘And Bob’s your uncle!’
Spontaneously, you might answer; Sorry? I don’t have an uncle Bob (unless of course you do, and then you would probably ask; how do you know my uncle Bob?).
Basically, your new or potential business partner is saying that something is straightforward or easily accomplished.
A confusing phrase but with a positive meaning.
If a house is a culture, then language is the key to opening the door. And with that little language introduction, you’ll need to find other ways to get to know one another. Luckily, beer and sport are other things we have in common.
In closing, I would like to thank everyone involved for making our stay in Uluru, Canberra and Melbourne so special.
It touches me deeply that my family and I are always welcomed with such warmth and interest and, that we continue to have a place in Australian’s hearts and minds.
To be remembered is not something to be taken for granted.
But I recall it is an endearing Australian trait that when an Australian does well abroad, you take pride in the fact that they are one of your own.
In my speech to Frederik on his 50th birthday, I said:
”Vores rødder gror gennem hele livet.”
In English,
“Our roots grow throughout our lives.”
I feel so incredibly privileged to have my roots in both Australia and Denmark.
Thank you.

