Title: Holger_Schou_Rasmussens_tale_ved_indvielsen_af_det_første_tunnelelement_i_Femern_Bælt_tunnelprojektet
Date: 2024-06-17
Talegenre: Indvielsestale
Organisationer og bevægelser: Socialdemokratiet


Indledning
Hello - My name is Holger Schou Rasmussen. I am the mayor of Lolland Municipality, and I would like to welcome you all to Rødbyhavn and to Lolland Municipality on this special day.
I have been looking forward to saying a few words, and first; I would like to congratulate everyone on today's milestone.
217 meters. It might not sound like much. In fact, it's only about the length of two football pitches, and a fast sprinter can cover 217 meters in less than a minute. However, it represents a significant and important step for all of us who are here today.
Hoveddel
The 217 meters is a part of a long journey:
The decisive treaty – in which Denmark and Germany agreed on the permanent link – was signed in 2008. And a couple of years later, it was decided that the tunnel elements should be built here in Rødbyhavn.
In 2020, we received the decisive verdict in the German Federal Administrative Court, which paved the way for the Femern Belt connection on the German side. And a few months later – in 2021 – we marked the ground-breaking step with the first official shovels in the ground.
In 2023, it was decided to preserve the factory, and today – in 2024 – we are celebrating the first tunnel element!
It's a journey that will one day be a 10-minute trip to Germany. But it's also a journey that has taken years so far and at the same time signifies a path to a new future – To all of us. Locally, here in Lolland. Regionally, in the Fehmarn Region. Nationally, in our respective countries. And internationally, when Scandinavia will be connected to Central Europe in a new and enhanced manner.
Many have already noticed the new Fehmarn Region, and the area has the potential to become an exciting center for new investments, right in the middle of the major transport corridor between Copenhagen and Hamburg. It provides growth and development, vitality and optimism, and the potential seems only to grow larger and larger.
At Lolland, we are already experiencing the many positive consequences - It affects all parts of our society - From employment and business development to settlement, tourism and service offerings. And we rejoice the additional job opportunities and the international environment that has quickly become an exciting addition to our local community.
We look forward to continuing to seize the many new opportunities and contribute to developing a new community across the entire Fehmarn region.
Afslutning
On behalf of Lolland Municipality, I would like to express our gratitude to everyone who is currently involved or has been a part of this journey. Thank you for your contributions, for the strong cooperation, and for the ongoing constructive dialogue.
It is said that; "a journey of a thousand miles begins with the first step." That quote seems fitting for today. The first step may require courage, take a long time, and involve extensive preparation. But often, it's also the hardest part. And once you've taken the first step, the next ones often become easier – and before long, you've reached your goal and destination.
It’s an exciting journey that I look forward to continuing to follow in the years to come.
Thank you.

