Title: Jens_Stoltenbergs_tale_ved_pressemøde_om_Danmarks_bidrag_til_den_transatlantiske_alliance
Date: 2022-05-19
Historisk kontekst: Krigen i Ukraine 2014/2022-
Organisationer og bevægelser: NATO
Talegenre: Politisk tale


Prime Minister Frederiksen,
Kjære Mette,
Thank you so much for your leadership, for your strong personal commitment to our transatlantic Alliance.
And also for the fact that Denmark is contributing in many different ways to our shared security, to our collective defence.
Including with forces in our multinational battlegroup in Estonia and also now with  new troops in Latvia.
Fighter jets on patrol over the east of the Alliance in air policing missions.
And regular Danish contributions to our maritime deployments, from the High North to the Mediterranean.
All of this matters, as we face the most dangerous security situation in Europe for decades.
The Euroatlantic family has responded to Russia’s brutal invasion of Ukraine with unprecedented unity.
NATO fully supports Ukraine’s right to self defence, enshrined in the UN Charter.
That is why Allies, including Denmark, are stepping up their support for Ukraine.
Ukraine can win this war.
Historic decisions are now being taken.
I welcome, as you, Mette, the fact that Finland and Sweden have applied to join NATO.
The security interests and concerns of all Allies need to be taken into account.
And I am confident that we will come to a quick decision to welcome both Sweden and Finland to join the NATO family.
And when they join, ninety six percent of the EU population will live in a NATO country.
Not only do we share population.
But we also share the same neighborhood, and the same challenges.
NATO and the European Union are now working more closely together than ever before.
Supporting Ukraine, but also on military mobility, maritime issues, cyber, and we work together in the Western Balkans.
I welcome the European Union’s efforts on defence.
Done in the right way, this will strengthen NATO and the European Union.
With increased defence spending,
new defence capabilities,
and a stronger European defence industry.
This will also benefit the transatlantic Alliance.
At this critical moment for our shared security, we need even stronger multilateral institutions.
And even deeper international cooperation.
Dear Mette,
Thank you again.
I look forward to continuing the close cooperation with you and with Denmark.

