Title: Jeppe_Kofods_tale_ved_FN-konferencen_om_NPT-traktaten
Date: 2022-08-01
Historisk kontekst: Krigen i Ukraine 2014/2022-
Organisationer og bevægelser: Socialdemokratiet


Mr President,
I am pleased to address this assembly on behalf of the Nordic countries - Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country, Denmark. Allow me to congratulate you on assuming the office of President of this Review Conference.
We are convinced that your able leadership will facilitate a successful outcome. Rest assured of our full support.
***
Mr. President,
The Nordic countries condemn in the strongest way the unprovoked and unjustified aggression of the Russian Federation against Ukraine. Russia’s invasion of a sovereign state is a gross violation of international law, including the UN Charter and it severely undermines European and global security and stability. We also condemn Belarus for its involvement in the Russian aggression against Ukraine.
President Putin’s threats of use of nuclear weapons seriously undermines and has a significant negative impact on the nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament architecture.
Mr. President,
2020 marked the 50th anniversary for the Nuclear Non- Proliferation Treaty, the cornerstone of the global nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation regime.
For half a century, the Treaty has made people more secure from nuclear havoc, and it has facilitated peaceful uses. We must use this opportunity to commend its achievements, and to strengthen the implementation of the Treaty.
In challenging times, it is more important than ever to safeguard the nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation and arms control architecture.
We are convinced that multilateral solutions and respect for the international rules-based order are the best ways to solve global problems.
We strongly support all three pillars of the NPT and continue to promote a comprehensive, balanced and full implementation of the 2010 Review Conference Action Plan.
We stress the need to implement all obligations under the NPT, and commitments made during previous Review Conferences. This includes concrete progress towards the ultimate goal of a world free from nuclear weapons.
***
The Nordics have presented important and concrete actions to further the implementation of the NPT, including through the Stockholm Initiative on Nuclear Disarmament.
The “Stepping Stones” working paper offers practical measures that can be taken to advance nuclear disarmament, build confidence and lay the ground for even further steps.
The Nordics also support the Initiative’s Working Paper on Nuclear Risk Reduction. While not a substitute for disarmament, risk reduction is a step on the way.
We urge the Conference to consider the recommendations, which include a comprehensive process to follow up within the NPT.
The Nordics have been instrumental in advancing the work on nuclear disarmament verification through the UN GGE and initiatives like the Quad Partnership and the International Partnership for Nuclear Disarmament Verification.
We are encouraged that this work is gaining momentum and encourage the conference to highlight and support efforts on nuclear disarmament verification.
The work of the “Creating an Environment for Nuclear Disarmament Initiative” has also shown its value in providing a framework for furthering the exchange of views.
***
Mr President,
Before the Russian aggression against Ukraine, there were some positive developments. Among those:
The
5 year extension of
the New START Treaty,
the
Strategic Stability Dialogue between the United States and
Russia,
the
restatement of the 1986 Reykjavik Summit Declaration and
the
P5 declaration after the Paris meeting.
We attach the highest importance to the New START treaty and call for seeking further reductions.
A future agreement should possibly include all nuclear weapon categories. We would welcome further discussions on confidence-building, transparency, risk reduction and verification activities in a future agreement.
China’s arsenals is growing. We call on China to actively engage in processes on arms control as a responsible nuclear weapon state.
***
Mr President,
Last year marked the 25th anniversary of The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban Treaty.
We strongly urge states that have not yet done so, in particular the remaining Annex II states, to sign and ratify the treaty, securing a legally binding moratorium on nuclear testing.
The Nordics support a working paper acknowledging the close link between the CTBT and the NPT. We also reaffirm our support for immediate negotiation and conclusion of a Fissile Material Cut-off Treaty.
***
Mr President,
Non-Proliferation and Peaceful Use are central to the overall implementation of the NPT.
We pledge our full and continued support for the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency in its crucial role underpinning the implementation of the NPT through its safeguards system.
Developments on the Korean Peninsula remain central to peace and development in the region and beyond. The continued nuclear weapons and ballistic missile programmes of the DPRK are of utmost concern.
We fully support efforts to preserve the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
.
We welcome the stated intention of the United States to return to the JCPOA and we urge Iran to return to full compliance without delay.
***
Mr. President,
We underline the strong role of the civil society. Gender equality, empowerment and full inclusion of women and youth, as the leaders of tomorrow, should be the order of the day.
Incorporation of a gender perspective will lead to more solid and sustainable outcomes and thereby strengthening international peace and security.
The Nordics are strongly committed to working towards a successful outcome of the Tenth NPT Review Conference. We stand ready to contribute to this goal.
Thank you for your attention.

