Title: Jesper_Nygards_tale_ved_abningen_af_den_danske_pavillon_i_Paris
Date: 2024-07-25
Talegenre: Åbningstale


Your Majesties. Mr. ambassador. Ladies and gentlemen.
The Olympic Games are always a very special event. Right now, the whole world is coming together here in the city of light. That’s a big deal! And it gives me great pleasure to participate in the opening of the Danish pavilion.
My name is Jesper Nygård. I am the CEO of the philanthropic organisation, Realdania. Realdania works to promote quality of life through the built environment and improve the physical framework for everyday life in Denmark. Where we live. Where we work. Were we go to school and get an education. And not least, where we spend our spare time.
Many of us spend our spare time being active in one or often more of many the associations and clubs that are such a characteristic feature Danish culture. Yes, in Denmark we often talk about having a culture of associations. And that’s something to be proud of.
The world is characterised by increasing polarisation. Therefore, the social cohesion of society is more important than ever – and gathering around common interests can really make a difference.
A broad range of associations add a common experience to the daily life of many Danes. And many of these associations are about exercise, athletics, or sports – exactly what also brings us together here in Paris.
For many people, being a member of an association makes a difference to their quality of life. In an association, you experience community. Meeting up with others to share a common interest makes a difference to how you feel and flourish in life. It matters – not just physically, but also mentally and socially.
Perhaps this culture of associations is part of the reason for the generally high level of quality of life in Denmark. At least that's what some researchers find. Either way, Denmark is one of the happiest countries in the world.
Personally I believe that this culture has a lot to do with the very high level of trust in our little society. We do have a lot to learn from the rest of the world. That is why we are born with 2 eyes and 2 ears – and only one mouth :-).
But I think that the level of trust is a thing that could be good for the rest of the world to be inspired from. And meeting with people, talking to people and to open our house to share these experiences with others is exactly an important part of that.
Through almost 100 cases, the exhibition in the Danish pavilion focuses on how Denmark is one of the "world champions" in creating quality of life and securing the good life. Realdania is responsible for some of the cases presented, including those that deal with housing as well as the green transition and recycling through the built environment. For example, our efforts to create a new type of housing community for seniors is presented. A type of housing that is in high demand at a time when there are more and more of us with grey hair – or just a little hair. Or in fact – no hair :-).
A special feature of the exhibition is that it is actually in itself an example of recycling through the built environment. The chairs on display are made from industrial plastic waste and wood. They were designed by the Danish architectural firm, Lendager Group. Originally, the chairs were intended to be part of the Danish pavilion at the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. Unfortunately, COVID-19 prevented this and the chairs never made it to Japan. Instead, we're using some of them here. The rest of the chairs have found their way to Milan Design Week, the famous Roskilde Festival and to the student halls in the Danish Student House here in Paris.
You'll have the opportunity to take a closer look at the chairs, the senior cohousing projects and much more a little later.
On a final note, I would like to thank VisitDenmark, the Ministry of Industry, Business and Financial Affairs, the Danish Industry Foundation and everyone at the House of Denmark in Paris for excellent cooperation in connection with the Danish pavilion, the exhibition and the recycled chairs made of recycled plastic.
With these words, I wish everyone a great time with the pavilion and the exhibition.
Thank you for your attention.

