Title: Lars_Løkke_Rasmussens_tale_ved_Folketingets_markering_af_3-arsdagen_for_krigen_i_Ukraine
Date: 2025-02-19
Historisk kontekst: Krigen i Ukraine 2014/2022-
Talegenre: Mindetale
Organisationer og bevægelser: Moderaterne


Dear Ukrainians. Dear Danes.
I think we all remember the morning of February 24th 2022.
Missiles over Kyiv. Russian soldiers crossing the border to Ukraine in a full-scale invasion.
Putin’s all-out attack on a free and independent country in Europe.
Putin thought it would be a short war, he thought it would end what he started in 2014. That Ukraine would surrender. That Europe would be divided.
But that did not happen.
The Ukrainian people stood up against the aggressor and pushed Russia back. Three years later Ukraine is still fighting. Defending their freedom. An admirable accomplishment.
However, it is a long war. And the human sacrifices have been enormous.
No one wants peace more than Ukraine. But it must be on the right terms.
Some may say I repeat myself. And I will gladly do so because it cannot be said enough:
Denmark supports Ukraine.
For as long as Putin threatens peace.
For as long as necessary.
*
Peace in Ukraine is key to Europe’s security, and Europe has supported Ukraine’s fight for freedom since the beginning.
Therefore, Ukraine and Europe must be at the table in any negotiations. We must reach a just, sustainable, and lasting peace. Where Ukraine can control its own borders. Decide its own security arrangements.
A peace deal must prevent Russia from attacking Ukraine again.
At the same time, we must maintain the strongest possible economic and political pressure on Russia. Sanctions are crucial. Russia must understand the consequences of their aggression.
These were my main messages at the Security Conference in Munich last weekend. Nothing about Ukraine without Ukraine. And nothing about Europe without Europe.
And I, together with my European colleagues, will continue to repeat those messages.
*
Right now, Ukraine must be put in a position of strength. We need to achieve peace through strength. This means strong support for Ukraine now.
The best way of doing this is by continuing and intensifying our support to Ukraine.
I am proud that Denmark is the biggest contributor of military support to Ukraine relative to our size. In absolute numbers we are fourth.
This sends a strong signal about our commitment to the security of Ukraine now and in the long-term. We must inspire other countries to support with more. It is a matter of security for Europe.
*
Last year when I visited Mykolaiv, a city that Denmark has taken special responsibility to help rebuild, I spoke with a group of students.
They were proud of Ukraine’s resistance. Proud to have held the Russians back. And they had no doubt about their future:
They want to be part of Erasmus, the EU’s student exchange program.
Because they are Europeans.
Ukraine is a European country.
Part of the European economy.
A nation in the heart of Europe.
And that is why we must support Ukraine on its path to EU membership – just as we helped the Baltic states join the EU after they achieved their independence.
The fight against Russia’s aggression is a fight for freedom. Freedom to choose your country’s direction. Towards EU.
*
Denmark will continue to support Ukraine in every possible way.
Through private investments.
Through civil society organizations.
Through our reconstruction efforts.
Through military aid.
We do this when we commit to help rebuilding Mykolaiv. Together with Ukraine, we have laid out a three-year plan for reconstruction – green energy transition – and good governance.
This plan is a commitment.
We also support Ukraine when we donate F-16 fighter jets.
And when we invest directly in Ukraine’s defence industry.
We must continue.
And we must inspire more countries to follow.
Ukraine’s freedom is our freedom. It is Europe’s freedom.
We must take greater responsibility for our own security in Europe.
For Ukraine’s security.
Denmark will stand by Ukraine all the way.
*
One of the things that has impressed me the most when visiting Ukraine is the will of its people.
In Mykolaiv, children go to choir practice and play football.
Parents go to the market and to work.
They insist on living their daily lives.
Even though every Ukrainian has been deeply affected by the war.
Many of you in the Ukrainian diaspora here today have family in Ukraine.
A spouse, brother, or son in the armed forces.
Family in frontline cities like Kharkiv and Zaporizhzhia.
Or in the capital, Kyiv.
You will never forget February 24, 2022.
And my promise to you is this: Neither shall we.
Thank you.

