Title: Mette_Frederiksens_tale_om_europæisk_forsvar_og_sikkerhed_pa_Hærens_Officersskole
Date: 2025-03-18
Talegenre: Politisk tale


Welcome, all of you.
And a very warm welcome to you, Ursula.
It’s a pleasure to see you here in Copenhagen. So we can take the next steps towards a safer Europe.
Europe is at a crossroads. We are now facing the greatest challenges since the 1940’s.
As you have said, Ursula: We face a clear and present danger.
And now it’s time to rearm. We need to do it with strength. And we need to do it fast.
* * *
Just two weeks ago, we agreed in the European Council on enabling huge investments in our defence.
Our discussion was framed by the ambitious proposals from the Commission. And Ursula - you set the tone by highlighting that we need to act urgently. Thank you for the clear message – I could not agree more.
However, the financing is an important first step. But the real test: We need to convert money into concrete action.
Every country needs to deliver what’s necessary.
Tomorrow, you will present a white paper outlining the way forward on behalf of the Commission. A crucial step.
Europe must be able to defend itself. And we need to take action now to ensure this.
I hope we can set a very clear goal to strengthen our European defence and security.
I have suggested an ambitious goal: That Europe should be able to provide the necessary capabilities for us to defend ourselves by 2030 at the latest.
Therefore, we must plan our steps towards this goal. And make sure that we deliver.
We need to deter Russia. We need to defend our own territory. We need to defend our borders. Our liberty and our values.
And we – the European nations – should do whatever we can to support this effort:
We have to scale up our defence industry.
We have to pool our resources.
We have to procure more together.
And we have to break down any barrier and obstacle in our way.
* * *
Is it possible? Of course, it is.
We just need to look to Ukraine.
In only a couple of years, they have built an incredible defence industry that few believed was possible.
We have to learn from Ukraine. We have to speed-up innovation and production. And work to integrate Ukraine into the European defence industry.
And it goes without saying: We must continue our steadfast support for Ukraine’s brave fight for freedom.
* * *
With the actions we are taking now. We are building a new Europe.
A stronger Europe. A free Europe. Our Europe.
And with these words, the floor is yours, Ursula.

