Title: Michael_Aastrup_Jensens_tale_ved_Folketingets_markering_af_3-arsdagen_for_krigen_i_Ukraine
Date: 2025-02-19
Talegenre: Debattale
Historisk kontekst: Krigen i Ukraine 2014/2022-
Organisationer og bevægelser: Venstre


I would like to begin by paying a special notice to all the Ukrainians who are able to join us here today. To those who have served in the army, to those who continuously have reported from the frontlines, and to any others, who are here to bring attention to this atrocious war.
It has been three years since Russia launched its brutal full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Three years in which many thousands Ukrainian soldiers and civilians have lost their lives, families have been forced to manage without stable electricity and heating, and the country’s economy has struggled to survive. The number of lives lost is overwhelming—it is far too many.
Time and again, both here in the Danish Parliament and during my visits to Ukraine, I have emphasized that if we fail to stand firm now, it will only become harder to stop the march of evil. Ukraine is not “just another European country”; Ukraine is a democracy. A democracy defending the same values on which our own institutions are founded. That is why Denmark’s full support must—and will—continue.
Denmark’s support for Ukraine is not just a question of moral obligation; it is about our own security and our shared future in Europe. This situation demands that Denmark, as part of NATO and the EU, take our defense commitments seriously.
During my most recent trip to Ukraine, I spoke with Ukrainian officials who underlined the vital importance of Europe’s weapons deliveries and financial assistance. They stressed how much it means that countries like Denmark take the lead. Investing the necessary resources in our own defense sends a clear signal to Moscow, that neither we nor our allies will hesitate to stand together.
Denmark is a leading force in Europe—not only militarily but also diplomatically. It is high time we clarify the path toward a future Ukrainian membership in the EU and NATO. We must unite around the values we share. Ukraine is not part of Russia—it is part of Europe!
I want to make one thing clear today: We must take the threat from Russia extremely seriously. We must act. Thankfully we have Parliament united in supporting Ukraine militarily, economically, and politically. However, freedom doesn’t come for free. It comes at a cost, which we must be prepared to pay. Therefore, I am proud to have a fully unified committee behind me, which unanimously have supported all the civilian and military aid packages to Ukraine.
I have seen how much it means to Ukrainians when we show solidarity through both action and words. But even more importantly, I have seen what is at stake if we fail them. Therefore, let us remain steadfast in our solidarity. Let us continue to invest in our defense so that our children and future generations are never forced into another all-encompassing conflict. Let us stand together to preserve a free, peaceful, and democratic Europe.
Finally, it is my honor to introduce a distinguished guest, joining us for a virtual remark. As the chairman of the Ukrainian Parliament, Ruslan Stefanchuck has played a pivotal role in his country’s fight for democracy and sovereignty. Today, we have the privilege of hearing directly from him about the war, so please join me in giving him a warm welcome!
Thank you.

