Title: Naja_Mathilde_Rosings_tale_i_Europaparlamentet
Date: 2026-02-11
Talegenre: Kalaallisut Oqalugiaatit
Talegenre: Politisk tale


Kalaallit Nunaat – Kalaallit pigaat.
Greenland belongs to the Greenlandic people.
Dear everyone,
What an honor it is to stand here today and speak about my personal experiences, rooted in Inuit identity and freedom.
I am a child of the Danish Kingdom  my father is Inuit, and my mother is Danish.
I have lived, breathed, and called both Kalaallit Nunaat and Denmark my home.
This subject is deeply close to my heart. Conversations like these have been part of my life for as long as I can remember. My journey began long ago and is rooted in identity, resilience, and pride.
In Greenland, you cannot own the land – and I think that says a lot about the mentality of the Indigenous Inuit people. In our culture, you grow up learning to respect nature and the land, to protect and preserve it.
When the United States made it clear to the world that they wanted Greenland at all costs, it spread a wildfire – a wave of fear and psychological terror among the Inuit, many began wondering where they would go if the conflict escalated into war. That fear echoed across all continents, especially in Europe.
The United States has a long history of forcibly taking land from Native Americans, stealing land from the Inuit in Alaska, overthrowing the Kingdom of Hawaii – and the list goes on. They wanted to bring that same poison of threats, greed, and desire for power to one of the most peaceful places on Earth. They disrespected Greenland, our people, and threatened the integrity of the Danish Kingdom and the unity of NATO itself.
But we did not stay silent. We stood together, shoulder to shoulder – and fought for justice.
Today, there is no doubt: neither Greenland nor the Greenlandic people can be bought with American dollars, nor taken by military force. Our allies in NATO have made that very clear.
The Inuit people of Greenland have survived for thousands of years in one of the harshest environments on Earth. We speak a language that only a few in this world still speak — and yet, we endure.
Do you know how?
With love.
With stories and songs passed down orally through generations.
By reading and understanding our surroundings.
By living in harmony with nature.
By adapting and cultivating skills that can only be learned through lived experience.
We are the Inuit of Kalaallit Nunaat — and we deserve acknowledgment and we deserve respect.
So when I’m asked what Greenlandic identity and freedom mean to me, I answer simply:
“To just be.”
To be – without explanation. Without defense. Without the need to convince anyone of who we are or what we value.
I want the younger generations to know that they can be and do anything they dream of, because they are just as capable as any other child in this world.
We are different – yes – and for many years that has been said as if it were a weakness. But this narrative should be told by us. We are different because we are unique. We are different because we are spiritually and physically aware. We are different because we are rare – in the best possible way.
It is important to show all the nuances of what it means to be Inuit. There is no single, correct way to exist – as long as you are a good person. I think we need representation in all its forms: Inuit politicians, Inuit artists, journalists, the Inuit LGBTQ+ community, influencers sharing about culture and nature, but also those thriving in beauty, fashion, and everything in between.
Right now, we have an incredible opportunity to show the world the many shades of Inuit identity today.
I am just one among many. My life experiences have shaped me into a proud Inuk woman who loves to share our culture, history, and stories. I embrace the feminine concept of beauty pageants, but I also like to hunt, I am deeply spiritual, and I value peace and humility.
My biggest dream has always been to uplift the Inuit, people and to inspire a shared sense of respect and love, a love that is universal no matter where you are from. To show that you are good enough just as you are.
Our history is long and painful – but I am here today to speak about the future.
I believe that independence is near for Greenland — but when WE are ready. Because what has been taken by the outside takes even longer to rebuild from within.
I also believe that we, as Inuit, carry an important responsibility to embrace one another, to lift each other up, because if we don’t, we will speak in the same language as the colonizers.
I was once told, that I tried to be something I am not. But the truth is, I am simply trying to be everything, that I am.
I believe in love. I believe in rewriting history and I believe in new beginnings.
Kalaallit Nunaat, Kalaallit pigaat – Grønland tilhøre grønlænderne – Greenland belongs to the Greenlandic people.
Thank you.

