Title: Peter_Birchs_prædiken_ved_fredsgudstjeneste_for_Ukraine
Date: 2024-02-23
Historisk kontekst: Krigen i Ukraine 2014/2022-
Talegenre: Prædiken
Historisk kontekst: Prædikener fra 2000-tallet


On behalf of the National council of churches in Denmark, on behalf of the Danish churches and the Danish people, let me reassure all present Ukrainians that you continue to be in our hearts, minds and prayers.
We, as Danes, do not understand the brutality of the war and how devastating the Russian invasion of Ukraine has been. We have seen pictures of destruction, ruins and people in despair. But we do no fully – even after two years of war – understand how much you have suffered. We offer our compassion, tears and hands to you – in recognition of your suffering and the immense sacrifice the war has demanded from your people.
We are gathered here today to show Ukraine that the victims of war are not forgotten. And we are gathered to show our despair and dismay of the continual war. Together, Danes and Ukrainians, we offer our prayer for a just peace for Ukraine. We pray for the return of peace to Ukraine.
Christ has taught us that every human being has been created by God and know God in love. We pray for a renewal of our hearts and a renewal of peace.
We are gathered today, Danes and Ukrainians, to share the sorrow created by this war. We share your sorrow over lost ones, the destructions of families, the flights from a beloved home, family or friends. We share your sorrow of the daily worry about loved ones at the front or at home, who face danger, destructions and uncertainty. We pray to our lord Jesus Christ to lift your burden, safeguard your family, friends and home. And we pray to Christ to restore peace and justice in your country and everywhere, where war destroys lives and communities.
We are gathered today to mark our protest against an unjust invasion. A war with a horrifying logic, where neighbours become enemies and where brothers and sisters become foes to be dealt with. We will not accept the language of this war. The invasion does not serve a higher purpose and cannot be justified. The death of innocent civilians, children, elderly, females and males in Kharkiv, Avdivka, Mykolaviv, Kherson, Lviv and Kyiv and elsewhere is a destruction of Gods creation.
As Christ himself says: “Blessed are the peacemakers, because they will be called children of God” (Matt. 5:9).
May our lord and savior, Jesus Christ lift our heart.
Lets us all pray Lords prayer each in our mother tongue:
Fadervor
Our Father in heaven,
hallowed be Your name, Your kingdom come,
Your will be done, on earth as in heaven.
Give us today our daily bread,
forgive us our sins, as we forgive those who sin against us. Lead us not into temptation,
but deliver us from evil.
For the kingdom, the power, and the glory are Yours, now and forever.
Amen

