Title: Are_museums_and_art_galleries_becoming_the_city's_new_underground_clubs_
Date: 2025-11-12
Article Type: Guides
Author: Here’s a handful of recommendations for the week in Copenhagen.

Lucas Arturo Ramsøe Willkens
Journalist
Party!
Your perhaps favorite community house is celebrating its birthday – and it’s going to be a blast. We’re talking about
Christianshavns Beboerhus
, which this weekend celebrates its 50th anniversary since the residents of Christianshavn occupied the demolition-threatened building on Dronningensgade and insisted on the realization of a new community house. They succeeded, and for 50 years, the user-driven culture centre has hosted experimental concerts, activist events, and quirky ideas.
A half-century of »culture, community, and strong roots in Christianshavn« is marked this weekend on Friday, November 14, and Saturday, November 15. Friday features a long-table dinner, free concerts with Natfuglene and Slim0, and a solo concert by Bisse (150 DKK). On Saturday, you can visit the house’s workshops all day and meet its users. Additionally, there are discussions on community as an organizational model. The band First Flush will perform in the evening (150 DKK), and DJ Emma AC will close the party. Read
more here
.
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
Experience!
Do you know Else Marie Pade? Maybe not, but you should. Else Marie Pade (born 1924) was a musician and resistance fighter during the occupation, where she ended up in prison. On the cell walls, she wrote her first compositions. Due to psychological scars from her captivity, she had to give up her dream of becoming a pianist after the war. Instead, she became a composer and later a pioneer in electronic music. In fact, she was the first Danish composer to work with concrete and electronic music.
On Tuesday, November 11, you can head to a so-called listening salon at
Posthus Teatret
in Indre By to learn more about the Danish pioneer and experience rare electronic works by her. In recent years, the record label Dacapo Records has been working on releasing all of Pade’s electronic works in new digital editions. This effort is celebrated with the new book »Complete Electronic Works 1955-2012«, which provides the best overview of Pade’s electronic production through both text and sound. The music will be introduced by the book’s author Jonas Olesen and music researchers Henrik Marstal and Katja Roos. Free entry. Read
more here
.
Experience!
Have museums and art halls become the city’s new underground clubs? It increasingly feels that way, as one art venue after another invites you to evenings with trendy concerts and dance floors lit up by DJs from the city’s clubs. This week, it’s
Arken
in Ishøj inviting you to the opening of the exhibition »Chameleon« by Kuwaiti artist Monira Al Qadiri. The exhibition deals with oil, its cultural heritage, and future: What will a future without this peculiar liquid, extracted from the depths of the earth, look like? Expect sparkling molecules, drill bits as jewels, and plenty of oil.
The exhibition opens this Thursday, November 13. In addition to experiencing the new exhibition, there will be plenty of music and art. Catch a performance by artist Sarah Olivia Klitgaard and concerts by indie duo Blush, musician Hasfeldt, duo First Hate, and DJ sets by Adidaddi and Suzie the Cockroach. Best of all, it’s free. Read
more here
.
Lucas Arturo Ramsøe Willkens
read next
Is this the city's most beautiful coffee shop?
