Title: Are_you_eligible_to_vote_There_is_a_good_chance_that_the_answer_is_yes
Date: 2025-10-31
Article Type: News
Author: The municipal and regional elections is around the corner and runs until November 18. A record number of foreigners will be able to vote this year and you are probably one of them.

Sara Vorre Rothstein
Journalist
Do you dream of more green areas in your city? Are you tired of high housing prices? Or maybe you have school-aged children and worry about their education? Then read on here.
In less than a month, there will be municipal and regional elections in Denmark, and you can help shape the future of your city, even if you are not a Danish citizen. A record number of foreigners will be able to vote in the upcoming election. In fact,
it is expected that 10 percent
of eligible voters are non-Danish citizens, and as for Copenhagen, it is more than 20 percent.
Therefore, Politiken has compiled a series of questions and answers about the upcoming election in this article.
Make sure to mark your calendar! On Tuesday, November 18, the municipal and regional elections will be held across Denmark, where citizens will select their local representatives for the next four years.
Denmark is divided into 98 municipalities that handle tasks close to citizens and their everyday lives. These include areas such as public schools, childcare, elderly care, public transportation, and integration of immigrants.
The
three largest municipalities
in Denmark are Copenhagen Municipality (669,000 citizens), Aarhus Municipality (377,000 citizens), and Aalborg Municipality (226,000 citizens).
Additionally, Denmark is divided into five regions responsible for, among other things, the healthcare system and psychiatry. Representatives for the regions will also be elected on November 18, but it is important to note that two regions will be merged at this year’s election. Instead of five regions there will be four in total: North Denmark Region, Central Denmark Region, Region of Southern Denmark and Region of Eastern Denmark.
Yes, if you meet certain criteria, you can vote as a foreigner in Denmark at the municipal and regional elections. It is estimated that
around 480,000 people
without Danish citizenship will be eligible to vote in the upcoming election.
You are eligible to vote if you:
In the Danish Parliament, Folketinget, there are 12 political parties: Enhedslisten, Alternativet, SF, Socialdemokratiet, Radikale Venstre, Moderaterne, Venstre, Konservative, Liberal Alliance, Dansk Folkeparti, Danmarksdemokraterne, and Nye Borgerlige.
For the local elections, you can choose either to vote for a party or for a candidate from one of the parties. In municipal elections, many voters cast their ballots for a candidate – this is called a personal vote. Moreover, there are also local parties running in the municipal elections.
A far-left party, they strongly emphasize socialism in their fight for a more equal society, as well as the need for large scale climate action and protecting the welfare system. They also advocate radical changes in the economic system.
Current leader: Pelle Dragsted
Party letter: Ø
A green party, especially focused on climate action and environmental sustainability. They also wish Denmark to recieve more immigrants and strongly believe in social innovation, and a more local and participatory democracy.
Current leader: Fransicka Rosenkilde
Party letter: Å
A left-wing party that advocates for wealth redistribution and strong social welfare. They also stress the need for environmental action and regulation as well as worker’s rights. The party also wishes to improve health care and psychiatry.
Current leader: Pia Olsen Dyhr
Party letter: F, often referred to as SF
A center-left party and historically one of the largest parties in Denmark, often vying for the Prime Minister’s office. They traditionally represent the working class electorate, advocating for equal rights for all in a democratic society. Currently a part of the SVM government.
Current leader: Mette Frederiksen (Prime Minister)
Party Letter: A, often referred to as S
A traditional centrist party, advocating for a social security net for all members of society as well as civil liberties. The party is heavily pro-EU, traditionally anti-militaristic and has bettering education as a key issue.
Current leader: Martin Lidegaard
Party letter: B, often referred to as RV
A new centrist party, they position themselves as a pragmatic party, willing to cooporate to find solutions for Denmark in a rapidly changing world. They advocate personal freedom and responsibility, and wish to reform Danish health care. Currently a part of the SVM government.
Current leader: Lars Løkke Rasmussen
Party letter: M
A center-right party and one of the historically largest parties in Denmark, often campaigning with a candidate for Prime Minister. Venstre stands for traditional liberal values such as individual freedom. Currently a part of the SVM government.
Current leader: Troels Lund Poulsen
Party letter: V
A center-right party focused on conservative values, such as law and order, reducing government intervention in the economy, lower taxes and welfare and healthcare for everyone.
Current leader: Mona Juul
Part letter: C
A right-wing party, they advocate classic liberalism, lower taxes, debureaucratisation and individual freedom. They support free-markets, minimal government intervention and deregulation.
Current leader: Alex Vanopslagh
Party letter: I, often referred to as LA
A right-wing party, they are known for their nationalist politics and anti-immigration stance. They strongly advocate against immigration to preserve Danish cultural identity.
Current leader: Morten Messerschmidt
Party letter: O, often referred to as DF
A far-right party, strongly focused on anti-immigration and abolishing climate change initiatives. They claim to represent espeically the Danish farmer. They also advocate for improving the health care system.
Current leader: Inger Støjberg
Party letter: Æ, often referred to as DD
A far-right party with a strong nationalistic stance and anti-immigration policy. They also advocate for reduced public spending and traditional conservative values. Strong EU opponents, as they stand for more national sovereignty.
Current leader: Susanne Borggaard
Party letter: D, often referred to as NB
Since 1938, the Lord Mayor of Copenhagen has been a Social Democrat, but this year might see a shift in power, according to several political commentators and
polls
. So far, four candidates have announced their intention to run for the mayoral position. These are Line Barfoed from Enhedslisten, Sisse Marie Welling from SF, Pernille Rosenkrantz-Theil from Socialdemokratiet, and Jakob Næsager from Konservative.
Although it may seem confusing, Frederiksberg is not part of the Copenhagen Municipality. Despite being located in Copenhagen, Frederiksberg is its own municipality and therefore has different candidates for the municipal election.
Born May 24 1964, educated as lawyer.
Line Barfoed aims to secure:
Born February 25 1986, educated in History and Political science
Sisse Marie Welling aims to secure:
Born January 17 1977, educated in Political science.
Pernille Rosenkrantz-Theil aims to secure:
Born November 20 1973, educated as lawyer.
Jakob Næsager aims to secure:
You will receive a polling card by mail at least five days before the election. The card will tell you where to go to cast your vote on election day. This could, for example, be at a school, a town hall, or a sports center. On election day, you need to bring the polling card to receive a ballot. Here is a step by step guide:
If you are unable to show up in person on election day, you can vote in advance until November 14. This usually happens at the citizen service center or a library – check your municipality’s website to find out where you can vote early. Don’t forget to bring identification.
An analysis from
Momentum
, Local Government Denmark’s magazine, uncovered the most important election themes for voters in the upcoming election. Health and elderly care are the two areas most citizens consider crucial for their vote. Additionally, climate and environment, public schools, and public transportation are also high on the list.
For the youngest age group, 17-24 year olds, climate and environment is the top priority, with 39 percent of respondents saying it’s the most important issue.
The municipal and regional elections are likely the ones where citizens can have the most impact on their daily lives. City councils in the municipalities decide on matters such as the number of social educators in kindergartens, whether new housing will be built, if public transportation should be expanded, and much more.
Municipalities also hold responsibility for integration efforts, such as language education, housing, and labor market entrance.
In the last local election in 2021, voter turnout was 67.2 percent, according to
a study conducted by the University of Copenhagen
. Among foreign citizens, 29.1 percent headed to the polls. Voter turnout was highest among foreigners from the Netherlands, Sweden, and Norway, while it was lowest among foreigners from Romania, Bulgaria, and Poland.
Sara Vorre Rothstein
read next
Mayoral candidate vows 41,000 affordable homes for Copenhagen
Half of us don't know where we'll cast our vote in the municipal election
Socialdemokratiet and Radikale Venstre push back against the engine driving Copenhagen’s metro and harbor
