Title: Denmark_ranks_second_best_among_43_countries_for_children's_well-being
Date: 2025-05-14
Article Type: News
Author: Denmark remains the second best among the 43 countries measured by Unicef for children’s well-being, skills, and health.

The Netherlands and Denmark are the top two countries for children based on measurements of mental well-being, physical health, and skills.
This is according to a
new report released Wednesday by the UN’s children’s fund, Unicef
.
The same report was published in 2020, where the Netherlands and Denmark also ranked first and second respectively.
France takes third place, followed by Portugal and Ireland, according to the report, which compares data from 43 countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and the EU.
Denmark ranks third in both mental well-being and physical health. In terms of skills and competencies, Denmark is ranked eighth. This results in second place overall.
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
The report indicates a significant decline in children’s academic skills following the Covid-19 pandemic.
Top 20
1: Netherlands
2: Denmark
3: France
4: Portugal
5: Ireland
6: Switzerland
7: Spain
8: Croatia
9: Italy
10: Sweden
11: Hungary
12: Austria
13: Slovenia
14: Japan
15: Lithuania
16: Romania
17: Finland
18: Czech Republic
19: Canada
20: Slovakia
In the 43 countries surveyed, approximately eight million 15-year-olds – about half of the age group in these countries – were found to be unable to read, write, and perform arithmetic. The highest proportions were observed in Bulgaria, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cyprus, and Mexico.
Conversely, the report noted a decrease in child mortality and an increase in the number of students completing their education.
Overall, children’s well-being declined. Japan was the only country where children’s mental well-being improved.
Japan, Korea, and Slovenia are in the top third of countries when it comes to children’s skills and competencies. However, they fall into the bottom third regarding their mental health.
ritzau
