Title: Establishment_of_drone_center_delayed
Date: 2025-10-13
Article Type: News
Author: The government announced earlier this year that the Defence’s Drone Center would be completed by 2026 with 100 employees. But so far, the project is delayed and the money has been spent on buying a dilapidated farm in Funen.

Morten Skjoldager
Journalist
Jakob Hvide Beim
Forsvarsredaktør
Hans Davidsen-Nielsen
Journalist
Ambitions were high when Minister of Defence Troels Lund Poulsen (Venstre, V)
unveiled
the new drone center in Odense in March to bolster combat capabilities and stay ahead of developments, as he stated.
For several years, it has been clear that unmanned aircraft are the new frontier in modern warfare, underscored by the war in Ukraine and recent mysterious drone incidents over Denmark.
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
»Construction will start this year, and by 2026, the drone center will be fully staffed and operational with approximately 100 military and civilian employees«, Troels Lund Poulsen announced, while then-Deputy Defence Chief Kenneth Pedersen stated that the Ukraine war has »shown the importance of a rapid technological development cycle«.
»With the establishment of the drone center here at H.C. Andersen Airport, we now have optimal conditions for this collaboration and for creating an even stronger defense«, Kenneth Pedersen added.
Rundown
The drone center
In March
, Minister of Defence Troels Lund Poulsen (V) launched the drone center headquartered in Odense, which was to be located near the local airport Hans Christian Andersen Airport.
Approximately 725 million kroner
has been allocated to the project, which is scheduled to be completed next year with around 100 military and civilian employees. However, the project is now delayed and the detailed plan remains unclear. The drone center is led by former Jaeger Corps Chief Jens Peter Blomqvist.
So far, the most tangible result of the efforts is a worn farm with a hole in the roof and two hectares of land, which the Danish Armed Forces recently purchased for 1.3 million kroner. There is nothing happening when Politiken visits Beldringevej near Odense Airport, where the military has put a chain in front of the entrance to the
country property
.
»Military area. Access prohibited for unauthorized persons«, reads the yellow signs.
According to sources at the airport, the leadership of the drone center, led by former Jaeger Corps Chief Jens Peter Blomqvist, rarely appears on site. »Nothing is happening«, one source says, especially in light of the events of recent weeks. At several press conferences, the government has indicated that there will now be a major focus on drones.
After decades of budget cuts, the Danish defence suddenly finds itself in a situation where billions are being spent due to the threat from Russia and Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen’s (Socialdemokratiet, S) defense mantra »buy, buy, buy«. Things need to move quickly, and therefore, around 725 million kroner has been allocated to the defence’s drone center, which, in addition to training drone operators, must ensure that the army, navy, and air force keep up with the latest technological developments.
However, money and declarations of intent are not enough to get a drone center with 100 employees off the ground, as former Brigadier General Ole Kværnø notes, »it doesn’t just implement itself«, and so far, according to Politiken’s information, only a small handful of employees have been hired.
»A drone center will come eventually, because they are capable people. But it is likely more difficult than when the decision was made and the funds were allocated. Now there is an acute time pressure due to recent events, and it may be hard to meet and fix the political problem«, says Ole Kværnø, who, as director of the ’Centre for Defense Robotics and Autonomy’ at the University of Southern Denmark, helps coordinate the efforts between the military, industry, and the academic community.
There are a number of other activities involving drones at Hans Christian Andersen Airport, as it was named after the opening of the Storebælts Bridge in 1998, when the airport became more or less redundant. Among other things, the test center is used by Ukrainians to test-fly their latest models, but Danish companies and universities also have their daily presence at the airport, where drones buzz in the air.
By contrast, the Danish Armed Forces has hardly been represented on Funen for decades, which has been called a defense desert, so Odense’s Mayor Peter Rahbæk Juel (S) was thrilled when the drone center was announced earlier this year.
»I’m pinching myself, it’s completely unreal, but it’s great«, the mayor told TV2 Fyn.
However, civilian airports are subject to
strict regulations
and safety controls, and therefore, the military cannot simply equip their drones with bombs and train offensive and defensive disciplines such as shooting down other unmanned aircraft.
According to airport director Hans Okholm Vejrup, drone pilots can be trained in the area near Odense, but not with explosives and ammunition, he says. The military also plans for some of the drone center’s activities to take place at Gniben at Sjællands Odde, where there are no such restrictions.
Military researcher Johan Gröne Christensen is a Ph.D. student at Aarhus University and is investigating how Denmark can prepare for hybrid attacks. He is also researching the use of drones in the military and has interviewed several key officers.
»In recent years, a small group within the Danish Armed Forces has tried to draw attention to drone developments, but until very recently, they have had difficulty making headway. Things are now starting to move, but as one officer expressed it, it has been something of a ’black hole’ for the Danish defence. This point was reiterated«, he says.
According to Johan Gröne Christensen, the facilities at the drone center on Funen may prove to be the least of the problems. For although staff need a building to work in, it may be »even harder to find enough people who can work dedicatedly with drones«, he says.
»Contrary to what might be expected, the proliferation of unmanned aerial vehicles like drones does not mean fewer employees are needed. On the contrary, experiences from Ukraine show that drone training alone requires many employees. Therefore, a central challenge will be to find and hire 100 military and civilian staff by 2026«.
It has not been possible to get an interview with the leadership of the drone center, but the Defence Command writes that the project is delayed, and they are now »working diligently on establishing the Defence’s Drone Center with headquarters in the Science Park in Odense.«
»A robust staffing is expected by 2026, with full staffing of the drone center expected by 2027. To be ready to receive the first group of conscripts, it has been decided that the army will conduct the first five months of basic training at the Slesvigske Fodregiment in Haderslev«.
Afterward, the plan is for the entire education to take place in Odense, and to the extent that the drone center needs to train with weapons, it will take place in military training areas elsewhere in the country. What will happen to the country property across from the airport – and whether the farm is still part of the drone center’s plans – is hard to say, as the Defence Command will not answer Politiken’s specific question.
However, the statement does note that »the Defence’s Drone Center will contribute to the overall defense against hybrid attacks...« should more unidentified drones pass through Danish airspace.
Hans Davidsen-Nielsen
