Title: Heading_north_by_train_Here_are_the_routes_that_will_make_your_summer_vacation_unforgettable
Date: 2025-07-29
Article Type: Culture
Author: Our neighboring countries offer world-class train journeys. We’ve compiled five stories from routes you will never forget.

Sune Højrup Bencke
Journalist
It’s a small, cursed stretch of 300 kilometers that’s the culprit. A section without railway between Norwegian Bodø and Narvik, which means that every train traveler’s dream of touring the Nordics by rail also involves a bus or car. But if you look past that, the Nordic railway is still open for you.
4,000 kilometers of landscapes and history that connect people from south to north and east to west
. Perhaps start by heading to Stockholm and then take the elegant night train all the way to Narvik in Norway. From Bodø, the Nordland Line takes you south to Trondheim and onwards to Oslo. How many stops you make is up to you – that’s the freedom of train travel.
GUIDE
Coolcation
Temperatures in Southern Europe
easily exceed 40 degrees during the summer months. And for some, that’s simply too hot.
So, we’ve gone through our archives
and rediscovered a series of articles from destinations that aren’t as scorching in the summer.
Follow along each week
and find inspiration for vacations by train, with children, active holidays, unique overnight stays, and experiences in Norway or Sweden.
In Europe, perhaps only Switzerland can rival Norway for the title of having the most fascinating railways. Both places offer historic engineering with bridges and tunnels and the wildest nature with mountains and valleys, but in Norway you’re also treated to deep fjords and moose in the brush. Five of the country’s most famous routes are the
Dovre Line, the Nordland Line, the Rauma Line, and the Bergen Line
– a combined stretch of over 2,500 kilometers that isn’t a meter too long. And not least,
the Flåm Railway
, Norway’s steepest railway, which takes passengers along mountainsides, frothy waterfalls, and dark tunnels.
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
In 2018, the Swedish railway company SJ held a contest where train travelers could vote on which of the country’s 12 train routes was the most beautiful. The honor went to
the western Swedish line called Kinnekullebanan
, where the 121 kilometers from Håkantorp to Gårdsjö, with plateau mountains and coniferous forests along the way, have captivated travelers since its establishment in 1910. Especially the stretch from Lidköping to Mariestad is said to be the country’s most beautiful. At least, some think so...
... but it’s hard not to also consider the Inlandsbanan, where
an old, charming Y1 train quietly traverses incredible wilderness landscapes and crosses the Arctic Circle
on its way to the land of the Midnight Sun in Lapland (at least in summer). It’s a journey you should treat yourself to if you want to experience a form of total isolation in nature. No other trains run on Inlandsbanan’s tracks, and along the way, the train driver will simply stop the train if there’s something particularly nice to look at.
Remember this. If your journey takes you to Stockholm,
the train is the most delightful, smartest, and eco-friendly way to do it
. Snälltåget runs daily from Copenhagen, SJ does from Malmö and soon from Copenhagen. And before long, possibly as early as 2026, DSB plans to run directly to Oslo, significantly reducing travel time.
Sune Højrup Bencke
