Title: Here_are_11_Copenhageners_sharing_their_most_bizarre_experiences_with_roommates_-_politiken.dk
Date: 2025-10-15
Article Type: Laurits Lauesen Otto
Author: 

If you’ve ever lived with a stranger, you know. It can be the perfect match. Or... anything but perfect.
Here, 11 Copenhageners share their most bizarre experiences with a roommate. Maybe you’re on the list?
After countless fruitless viewings, I was starting to feel nauseous from complimenting the light exposure and almost squealing in unison with the other equally desperate applicants when a real estate agent pointed out a small piece of rundown stucco on the living room ceiling.
But one day, the phone rang. We had gotten an apartment. I threw the keys in the mailbox of my building in Aarhus and jumped into a Tetris-packed van headed for the capital.
My two college friends and I moved into three of the apartment’s four rooms. We posted the last one on Facebook, curious to see if anyone would actually want to move into a broom closet of 6.5 square meters.
And someone did.
A few days later, we had over 40 applications, and the roommate interviews began.
We chose a law student our age, and it turned out to be a perfect match.
In our apartment, living together means a shared Netflix subscription, deposit money in a jar, and someone who always has clean socks. My roommates are the ones I call when life falls apart or I just need to borrow an egg.
But you also hear about how daily life in a home where you live so close that the toilet seat never gets cold can be the recipe for completely absurd arguments.
Summer is over, and for those like me who spent the holiday moving, the contents of the last boxes should have found their place in the shared living space. Now everyday life has set in, and in the apartments where the match wasn’t so perfect, conflicts might start knocking on the door.
Through social media, Ibyen has gathered a series of bizarre stories from life with strangers under the same roof.
»We moved in together after connecting through a Facebook post. One evening, when I came home to the apartment, there was a homeless man lying on the couch. I asked my roommate what was going on, and he replied that it was someone he had met on his way home from downtown. The man had wet his pants, and my roommate wanted to give him a place to take a warm bath and get a night’s sleep.
The problem was: My roommate had dressed him in my new sweater, which I had received as a birthday gift, and a pair of my new pants.
We got into an argument, but I ended up just going to bed. When I woke up the next day, the man was gone with my clothes and all the money from our shared jar. I demanded that my roommate cover what the homeless man had stolen. He was very offended and said he couldn’t afford it. After that, we didn’t really talk. We lived together for another two years.«
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
»My roommate once asked me if I would babysit her boyfriend’s three-year-old twins so he could go with her to the Tinderbox festival. He had them under a 10-4 custody arrangement, so he wouldn’t see them for the rest of the month. And I had never met the twins. I politely declined«.
»After borrowing our bathroom, my mom asked if an old Halloween decoration was sitting out there. There was, indeed, a basin filled with animal skeletons. We chuckled a bit at it, because my roommate had a habit of doing some pretty bizarre things. As days went by, the smell grew more nauseating, and spots began to appear on the water’s surface.
When he came home, it was with a friend who explained how my roommate had become fascinated with picking up dead animals from the roadside to skin, dissect, and finally boil them. The basin in the bathroom was the last step in the process, where the meat remnants were supposed to detach from the bones. My roommate added that it wasn’t weird, but that he ‘just’ wanted to make some decorations out of the bones.
It became a bit of a joke with my college friends that I shouldn’t be late to meetings because they worried I might be the next one to end up in the acid bath«.
»When I moved in, he was nice and cleaned up after himself – everything was going great. Once we found a third roommate, we decided to throw a housewarming party. He suggested we make a ’classy’ welcome drink, but the other roommate and I shot down the idea because we thought it was too expensive.
He got really angry about it, and it ended up with him being away all day and only showing up to the party late at night with his friends, where he started getting angry about everything and everyone, accusing my friends of stealing his laptop (which he embarrassingly found shortly after) and storming off again.
We didn’t see him for weeks and then were told he was moving out. The cherry on top, you ask? I found my bike covered in crap – it could have been one of the chic stroller-pushing moms in the newly built neighborhood we lived in, but I was and still am convinced it was him«.
»I moved in with a woman who was about 10 years older than me. She would leave around noon and wouldn’t return until midnight. I didn’t know what her job was or what she did with her time. That was until I needed to buy some hash, and it was her who came driving with it. I moved out a couple of months later«.
»I once lived with a dude who always ate my dinner leftovers from the fridge. He was completely open about it and sometimes exclaimed: »Fuck, that’s an insanely delicious red curry you’ve made, bro«.
I found it really annoying that he just stole my food, so I started putting half a habanero chili in my curries. Suddenly, I could hear him shouting from the kitchen: »Fuck, that’s insanely spicy food you’ve made, maaaaaan!« That was one of the last times he stole my food«.
»I moved into a room with two roommates. A guy and a girl. At first, they seemed really nice, and everything looked promising. The guy and I spent a lot of time together, and it didn’t take long before we kissed one night on our way home from a night out. The next day, I told the girl about it. She then replied that she had been with him. Several times.
Time passed, and even though I could see that he was a bit of a player, I went along with it, and we ended up agreeing not to see other people. I told my parents and all my friends about him, but they all said it was a bad idea to get involved with someone you live with.
A week ago, my friend found his Tinder profile. I confronted him, and he said he had gotten cold feet and wasn’t sure we were a good match after all. I can’t afford to move out again, so now I’m living with my my former situationship. It is honestly the strangest situation I’ve ever been in«.
»Jeg aftalte med to fyre at komme og se et værelse, som de ville leje ud til en tredje roomie.
First of all
fortæller de mig ALT lige fra, hvornår gummilisten i ovnen sidst er blevet skiftet til en gennemgående forklaring af parkering i området, efter jeg har sagt, at jeg ikke har nogen bil.
Efter hvad jeg gætter på er over en times samtale, siger den ene: »Der er jo selvfølgelig også lidt husregler: Man må ikke ryge i lejligheden. Det er kun mig, der må det«. Underligt, men so be it.
»Og nå ja, så er det ikke tilladt at have husdyr, men den regel overholder vi heller ikke … Troels har en kongepython på værelset«. Jeg sagde tak for kigget og fandt et andet sted at bo«.
»I arranged to meet two guys to check out a room they were looking to rent to a third roommate. First of all, they tell me EVERYTHING, from when the oven seal was last changed to a detailed explanation of parking in the area, after I’ve mentioned I don’t have a car.
After what I guess is over an hour of conversation, one of them says: »Of course, there are some house rules: No smoking in the apartment. Only I can do that«. Weird, but so be it.
»Oh, and it’s not allowed to have pets, but we don’t follow that rule either... Troels has a ball python in his room«. I thanked them for the viewing and found another place to live«.
»A few years ago, I moved into a large apartment where three guys were already living. In the beginning, I slept with a shirt over my eyes and earplugs in my ears because there were no curtains, and the street outside was full of noise.
One weekend night, about a month after I moved in, I suddenly woke up with a strange feeling. I pulled the shirt away from my eyes and saw that the light was on. In the doorway stood one of my roommates. I was shocked and made a sound that caused him to flee the room.
And only then, as he was heading out the door, did I realize: He was naked. He later claimed he couldn’t remember anything. I stayed for a year because I had just moved in and had no other options. His room was right next to mine, and the sound of his footsteps on the floor sometimes made it feel like he was walking around in my room. It took a long time before I slept soundly again«.
»My roommate moved in on Monday. She had written the classic introduction about herself: She was a quiet and calm girl who enjoyed a cozy home, and in her free time, she was totally into reading books, blah blah blah.
Cut to six days after moving in, when she brought two men home after work. They were talking loudly in the kitchen at four in the morning, having loud group sex, and peeing with the door open in a small 53 square meter apartment.
Basically, she can sleep with whoever she wants, but we don’t live in a swinger club. Next time she’s getting kicked out«
»My roommate had a cat that she almost never gave food or water. Her door was always closed, so the cat ended up coming to me.
I fed it and played with it, but every time she found out, she went completely crazy and accused me of trying to steal her cat. This happened several times.
One day, I had a friend from Jutland visiting. Plans changed, and he ended up having to spend the night alone in my room. As usual, the cat came in looking for water and food – and when she discovered it, she also accused him of wanting to steal the cat and take it back... to Kolding.«
Text: Laurits Lauesen Otto
Drawings:
Thit Thyrring
Editing: Louise Skov Andersen
Digital editing: Kira Bube
Som abonnent kan du ubegrænset dele artikler med dine venner og familie. Læs mere om fordelene ved et abonnement
her
.
