Title: Here_are_13_new_places_you’ll_want_to_know_in_Copenhagen
Date: 2025-11-26
Article Type: Guides
Author: Are you up to date on the Copenhagen food scene?

Ibyens redaktion
Here is an overview of the newly opened and upcoming eateries in Copenhagen:
For years, Vesterbro darling Italo Disco was located at Oehlenschlægersgade 5, but now the man behind it, Levan Engin, has decided to go in a completely different direction and open Turkish Showbiz at the same address.
The Turkish restaurant serves mezze for everyone, followed by a choice of main course – typically from the grill. The menu includes meat, fish, and vegetables, and the restaurant makes everything from scratch, such as chicken pilav and sarma. All meat is halal, and the dessert menu features baklava and rice pudding. You can, of course, wash it down with both raki and Turkish tea.
And the restaurant’s name? It comes from a fusion jazz track that Levan Engin’s father made sometime in the 1980s.
Turkish Showbiz. Oehlenschlægersgade 5, Kbh. V.
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
A few steps from Turkish Showbiz, there are other news on the way: On Værnedamsvej, chef Jonathan Balsløw Sørensen is undertaking a major renovation. Balsløw Sørensen already runs the Italian restaurant Graziano in Møllegade on Nørrebro, and it’s precisely that place that is now also popping up on Værnedamsvej.
The place will be called Bottega di Graziano, and the team promises an all-day venue where you can pop in for espresso and cornetto during the day, and in the evening, it becomes a restaurant where you can also drink late-night negronis. Graziano is moving into the premises that in recent years have gone by the names
Italo Caffe
, Italo Thai, Uno, and Due. Follow Instagram for the opening day.
Bottega di Graziano. Værnedamsvej 10, Kbh. V.
Maybe you’ve already seen it? The long line that has been winding down Falkoner Allé on Frederiksberg in recent weeks.
The queue is due to a burger. Or rather a burger bar named Casper’s, opened by the 38-year-old food influencer Casper Christiansen, better known as Casper Drømme, who has a quarter of a million followers on TikTok. Casper’s menu features smash burgers and fried chicken, and so far, there has been a queue every day and sold out every evening.
»I sell about 500 burgers a day«, says Casper Christiansen about the burger bar, which has been forced to close for a few improvised days due to the overwhelming reception, where, among other things, the power supply in the building couldn’t keep up.
»When we need to smash burgers and deep fry, it doesn’t help to run at half power. It needs full Gaddafi«, says Casper Christiansen, who plans to open two new branches in Gothersgade and Valby Langgade soon.
Casper’s. Falkoner Allé 26A, Frb.
»A huge hit« and »an exotic getaway«. That’s how Ibyen’s reviewer Lærke Kløvedal described Goldfinch in 2023, which is placed in a courtyard near Kongens Nytorv. Now the chef behind that restaurant, Australian Will King Smith, is ready with Kinyobi, which aims to rethink modern Japanese cuisine while offering guests a curated music program delivered by a DJ.
Kinyobi is named after the Japanese word for Friday and, according to a press release, aims to capture that moment of the week when the party begins. In addition to Will King Smith, chef Adrien Norwood is behind the pots. The two have previously worked together at Geranium.
Kinyobi. Antonigade 2, Kbh. K.
Normally, vegetable peels and day-old bread are things you throw in the compost bin. But at Nordhavn’s new restaurant Esse, such items end up on the plate.
Behind Esse is Noma’s former head chef Matt Orlando, also known from the now-closed Amass on Refshaleøen, and his ambition is to use alternative ingredients and other cuts than those we typically know, ensuring no part of the vegetable ends up as waste. It’s sustainability on a whole new level, and Politiken’s reviewer Lærke Kløvedal loved everything about it when she recently visited the restaurant.
However, she could have used a bit more information about what she was actually eating.
»New ideas thrive with supportive words and explanations, and there were few of those at Esse«, she wrote in her review, giving it four hearts.
Esse. Trelleborggade 13a, Nordhavn.
The city’s gourmet bakeries can start looking over their shoulders because a new competitor is opening soon, and it’s not just anyone behind it.
Kong Hans is probably best known as the first Danish restaurant to receive a Michelin star. That was back in 1983. But they are also famous for good bread and an almost iconic dessert trolley. Now, Copenhageners will have the chance to satisfy their sweet tooth without having to book a table at the restaurant when Kong Hans Bakery opens in December, just a stone’s throw from Kartoffelrækkerne.
»Over the years, we’ve experienced enormous demand for our bread and desserts, and the idea of letting more people enjoy them outside of the cellar has long been in the back of our minds«, says head chef Mark Lundgaard, according to Euroman, in a press release.
Kong Hans Bakery. Øster Farimagsgade 18, Kbh. Ø.
You might have stood in line to taste their burger. Maybe you were also one of those who had to wait for hours for their Shrovetide bun. And now you can get ready to head out to Noma on Refshaleøen again.
The famous restaurant has opened a new shop, and unlike the other ventures, this is a permanent concept. So no need for FOMO here
In the shop, which Noma itself calls a flavor shop, you can buy Noma Coffee, which until now could only be purchased by subscription, and hot sauce with yuzu and corn, vinegar with wild roses, and other products from Noma’s Projects series.
You can certainly drink your coffee on-site, and rumor has it that it’s good to do so on weekends. That’s when Noma chefs serve samples from the test kitchen.
Nomas kiosk. Refshalevej 96, Kbh. K.
Actually, Ibyen’s café reviewer Nasra Jama mostly wanted to keep quiet. Because it’s not every day you find a place with white tablecloths, fresh flowers in vases, good coffee, and a really nice atmosphere. But she ended up recommending Rantzausgade’s new café Bafi to Politiken’s readers. Because as she writes in her review:
»Good places deserve to be shared, and this is one of them«.
Bafi is a café, but also a small flower atelier and vintage shop where everything except the espresso machine can be purchased. While Nasra Jama was visiting, a couple, for example, left with the armchair they had just been sitting in. And it’s a place that serves chia porridge that really hits the mark, fluffy, buttery, syrup-dripping pancakes, and a simple but lovely breakfast plate.
Nasra Jama gave Bafi 5 hearts.
Bafi. Rantzausgade 42. Kbh. N.
»My partner and I quickly agreed that we were holding one of the capital’s best-curated glass lists«, wrote our reviewer David Dyrholm when he visited the wine bar Coco on Vesterbrogade.
Coco is part of the hotel of the same name, which has now also opened a restaurant, Olise, with 64 seats, a tight bistro menu, and a – as revealed on the website – rather impressive wine selection. It’s Cofoco behind Olise, where you can go à la carte or choose a menu of either four (445 kroner) or five courses (545 kroner).
Olise. Vesterbrogade 41, Kbh. V.
It started as a hobby project at home in the kitchen in 2023.
The Italian chef Riccardo had come to Denmark from Sardinia in 2019 and had become romantically involved with Danish Louise, whose favorite dishes he now made while she took pictures of the food for Instagram. Many followed along, and about a year ago, the couple started producing pasta and pasta sauce for restaurants and later also private customers, who received their delicacies delivered by cargo bike.
Now even more people can taste the couple’s pasta. They have opened a small shop on Gammel Kongevej. And there’s not just pasta on the shelves, but also, for example, wine from Sardinia and the Italian Christmas bread, panettone.
Laminata. Gammel Kongevej 147, Frb.
You know Bottega Barlie in the city center and Bottega Estadio in Østerbro, and now the Bottega folks have a new one on the way. It’s called Bottega Barlito, and it’s an all-day venue with breakfast, lunch, and dinner and opening hours from 7:30 AM to midnight.
The address is Esplanaden 7, right across from Bistro Boheme, and with that location, it’s no wonder the owners themselves describe the newest addition to the Bottega family as ’the chic little brother’. The head chef will be former Kadeau chef Svend Hviid, and the menu will feature especially shareable dishes.
Bottega Barlito. Esplanaden 7, Kbh. K.
Their sandwiches have already created queues on Værnedamsvej – and have even gone viral. Now Helges Ost has expanded. First, they opened a branch in Østerbro, and recently Valby got its own Helges.
And although the address in a corner location facing the heavily trafficked Vigerslev Allé doesn’t exactly exude the laid-back
la vie est belle
atmosphere known from Værnedamsvej, the queue has apparently moved to Valby.
It is reportedly the sandwich with cheese and optional charcuterie and toppings for 75 kroner that draws people in. But there are also various delicacies and, oh yes, cheese in the displays at Valby residents’ new favorite deli.
Helges Ost og Bageri. Vigerslev Allé 80, Valby
It started in 2013 in Gothersgade, and since then, Frederik Bille Brahe’s café Atelier September has moved to Kronprinsessegade and expanded to Hellerup and Nordhavn. Now Frederiksberg is also getting a branch of the café, which ranks high on international lists of ’The Coolest Cafes in Copenhagen’.
The Frederiksberg edition of the café, known for its avocado toast and mountains of whipped butter, will open at the corner of Gammel Kongevej and H. C. Ørstedsvej in premises that have previously housed, among others, an interior shop and a Greek bistro. When is still uncertain.
Atelier September. Gammel Kongevej 100, Frb.
Ibyens redaktion
read next
Who makes the best veggie burger in Copenhagen?
