Title: Here_you_can_find_a_slightly_alternative_christmas_market
Date: 2025-11-26
Article Type: Guides
Author: Here’s a handful of recommendations for the week in Copenhagen.

Here’s a handful of recommendations for the week in Copenhagen.
Lucas Arturo Ramsøe Willkens
Journalist
Experience!
You may have noticed that we are approaching December. Christmas hearts, æbleskiver, and especially Christmas markets have taken over the city, making it hard to miss the festive season. But if you’re tired of the milk chocolate and cheap plastic junk that often accompanies the celebration, you’ll be pleased to know that the ’farmers’ market organization’ Grønt Marked – which received the award for
this year’s initiative
at the Ibyen Prisen – is hosting an alternative Christmas market every Sunday in Advent. The first of its kind will take place on Sunday, November 30, at
Gammelholm
in the Inner City.
Here, a wide range of producers, farmers, chefs, bakers, brewers, beekeepers, and more are ready to sweeten your Sunday with locally grown ingredients and handmade products. Enjoy an organic mulled wine and find a thoughtful gift, such as a grass-fed duck – or simply a beeswax candle or some herbal tea. Christmas songs, cake decorating, and bonfires are also guaranteed. Free entry. Read
more here
.
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
Experience!
Do you also want to be someone who goes to the theater? But where to start, and can your wallet handle it? This week, you’ll find a completely free option at
Amager Bio
on Amager, where on Wednesday, November 26, and Thursday, November 27, you can experience the artist collective Compound’s performance ’Pas - Kampen om at høre til’. A show that tackles the question: What is it like to grow up in Denmark and feel that you don’t belong?
Street soccer player and TV personality Ali Jassem stars as young Isam, who lives an ordinary life in contemporary Denmark until a message in his e-boks turns everything upside down, and he must leave the country. Consequently, Isam fights to stay in the country where he was born and raised. Expect dance, theater, music, as well as humor, pace, and brutal honesty. As part of the vision of Copenhagen as the Children’s and Youth Culture Capital, City Hall is providing the ticket, but it must be booked in advance. Read
more here
.
Experience!
This Friday, November 28, is a bit special, and your email spam folder has probably already reminded you... shopping day Black Friday. This black day is being turned green by
Kulturhuset Indre By
, which is opening its doors for the evening ’Green Friday’ – »a Friday in the spirit of circularity«, as they say. And you are invited! So take a loved one by the hand and head to Charlotte Ammundsens Plads in the Inner City, which will be transformed both indoors and outdoors into a hub for upcycling and recycling.
Here you can find free recycled gifts at the gift and clothing swap market, enjoy concerts by Kantina and Ekkosystem, or participate in an upcycling workshop where you can, for example, learn more about felting with your feet. Additionally, there will be films, presentations, and three exhibitions ready to challenge our view on consumption. Completely free. Read
more here
. (And if you can’t get enough, the green weekend continues on Saturday, November 29, with the event ’Green Friday - on a Saturday’ at Sydhavn Recycling Center. Read
more here
).
Lucas Arturo Ramsøe Willkens
read next
