Title: Irish_rap_trio_and_Swedish_hit_machine_to_hit_the_stage_at_Roskilde
Date: 2025-11-28
Article Type: Guides
Author: Alongside Kneecap and Zara Larsson, American David Byrne and Danish rapper Tessa are also among the 23 new Roskilde names.

The Irish rap trio Kneecap, which has recently made headlines due to a case involving alleged support for terrorism, has been added to next year’s lineup for the Roskilde Festival, the festival announced in a press release. The release also revealed 24 new names for the summer festival’s program.
Roskilde Festival describes Kneecap as a band that »delivers a high-energy concert filled with political bite and society-scathing satire.«
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
The group, known for songs like ’Get Your Brits Out’ and ’Better Way to Live,’ is famous for its political lyrics and pro-Palestinian messages, which have been featured during their concerts.
One member of the trio, rapper Mo Chara—whose real name is Liam Óg Ó hAnnaidh—was also charged with endorsing terrorism after waving a Hezbollah flag during a concert in London. The case was later dropped due to a late indictment. However, the dismissal of the case has been appealed. Kneecap has previously expressed that they believe the trial was a political attempt to silence the members.
In addition to the Irish rap group, the lineup also includes Swedish artist Zara Larsson, who performed at Denmark’s Royal Arena last week. Larsson made a significant breakthrough on the international pop scene in 2015 at the age of 17 with her song ’Lush Life.’ Roskilde Festival expects Larsson to deliver a »grand pop show« when she takes the Orange Stage next summer.
On the same stage, festival-goers can also experience Danish rapper Tessa and British artist Little Simz.
»All three create absolutely amazing music, and they share the common trait of being very authentic and using their art to share themselves in a way that resonates,« said the festival’s music director, Thomas Sønderby Jepsen, in the press release.
Additionally, the American singer described by Roskilde as a rock legend, David Byrne, will return to the festival. The Scottish-born American Byrne, who has been the frontman of the avant-garde band Talking Heads, last performed at Roskilde Festival in 2018.
Besides the aforementioned artists, the remaining new names include Yung Lean & Bladee, Audrey Nuna, Esdeekid, Mille, Oklou, Royel Otis, Annie and the Caldwells, Ata Kak, Bruno Berle, The Callous Daoboys, Ecca Vandal, No Joy, Rizwan-Muazzam Qawwali, Rochelle Jordan, Sherelle, Tonser, Uld, Vgtbl.pl, and Yerai Cortés.
Ritzau
read next
Det britiske rockband The Cure gæster Roskilde for syvende gang
Sidste gang sluttede koncerten brat. Nu skal verdenskendt band igen spille på Roskilde
