Title: It_can_be_difficult_to_find_new_friends_in_Copenhagen._A_walking_community_aims_to_change_that
Date: 2025-10-08
Article Type: News
Author: Walking communities once again take over the streets of Copenhagen. One of them is Girlswalk, which manages to gather almost 100 women one to two Sundays a month.

Walking communities once again take over the streets of Copenhagen. One of them is Girlswalk, which manages to gather almost 100 women one to two Sundays a month.
Clara Underdahl
Journalist
People stop and stare.
Others take out their phones to film. Their lenses are pointed at the long line of women walking and chatting side by side.
»Is this a protest?«, asks a puzzled passerby.
A woman from the group turns her head and smiles:
»It’s a Girlswalk«.
It’s 11:45 on a Sunday morning. Ørstedsparken, usually filled with couples, dog walkers, and strollers, is also the meeting place for a larger crowd today. 89 women, to be exact.
»Welcome!«.
A young woman runs among the many attendees, greeting and introducing them to each other. The woman is 21-year-old Rimgaile Samuolyte, the organizer of today’s event and founder of Girlswalk.
»Girlswalk is an hour-long walk with a bunch of girls, all with the same goal – to find and develop new friendships«, explains Rimgaile Samuolyte, who hosts the walking event one to two Sundays a month.
Facts
Girlswalk
Founded by
21-year-old Rimgaile Samuolyte.
The first Girlswalk
took place in April 2025, and since then, eight walking events have been held.
The walks are organized
one to two Sundays a month. Date, time, and meeting place are announced on Instagram.
Participation is free
, and no registration is required.
She held the first Girlswalk back in April, when 70 people showed up. Since then, the number has gone up to 185.
The idea for the concept sprouted in 2023 after Rimgaile Samuolyte, who grew up in Hillerød, moved to Munich during her gap year.
As a newcomer, she experienced how several events in the city gave people the opportunity to form new relationships. This kickstarted her own thoughts of creating a similar initiative in Copenhagen.
»I thought, why not create a community, when so many – both foreigners, newcomers from Jutland, and even local Copenhageners – find it difficult to make friends in Copenhagen«, she says.
»A community where you can be yourself and don’t feel like you have to perform in front of others«.
The joint walks are popular at a time when
numerous running clubs
have taken over Copenhagen’s streets, just like the walking concept ’
Rundt om Søerne
’ every Sunday gathers young men aged 18-35 who miss a sense of community.
Today, Rimgaile Samuolyte’s videos of Girlswalk have over
200,000 views on TikTok
.
»It’s great that we have so many here today«, says Rimgaile Samuolyte, quickly gaining the attention of the many women in the park.
»The walk will last about 40 minutes. We’ll walk from Ørstedsparken, around the Lakes, and back«
When the walk is over, there will be a group photo, a collective goodbye, and then the women can continue their conversations on their own, she informs.
»Have a good walk everyone!«, Rimgaile Samuolyte shouts at last, and then she sets off through the park with a trail of women following her.
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
»I come from Ukraine but study at the University of Copenhagen. This is my second time participating in a Girlswalk. I arrived in Copenhagen two weeks ago and was thinking a lot about how I could make some friends in the city. I am quite socially inclined«.
»When you move abroad and don’t know anyone, there’s a need to meet people you can share daily life with, talk to, and share your thoughts with. People who show up to Girlswalk all have the same desire, so it’s easy to relate to each other«.
»It’s actually a pretty simple concept, but it works really well. And more and more people show up each time. On the last walk, I met some really nice girls, and we ended up having a cup of coffee afterward. I hope it can develop into a friendship over time«.
»I’m from Copenhagen, but I lived and studied in Aarhus for a year and a half. Now I’m back. Since I moved home, I’ve – perhaps naturally – experienced some of my relationships changing. Shifting rhythms. So my goal today is to expand my circle of friends and meet some new, nice people«.
»When I saw Girlswalk on Instagram, I thought it sounded like a cool idea. They create informal and safe spaces to meet new people – even as a Copenhagener, where you kind of ‘know the city,’ but still can miss new communities and conversations«.
»I live close to where the meeting point was today and thought: Why not give it a shot? I was a bit nervous at first, but was quickly introduced to some people when I arrived, which was nice. People are really open«.
Lucia: »This is the first time we’re participating«.
Did you know each other beforehand?
Alma: »Lucia and I study at the same university and have known each other for about a month. We both come from Spain«.
Manel: »I came alone, but quickly started chatting with Lucia and Alma, and they said I could join them«.
Alma: »It’s great to have a community for women where you can show up regardless of age and socialize. And you also get out of your comfort zone when you walk with a bunch of people you don’t know«.
Lucia: »It can be difficult to talk to the locals here in the city because people are very reserved – at least compared to people from Spain. It’s been a bit of a culture shock, but that’s why it’s great to participate in something like this. Get out, be active, talk, and see a bit of Copenhagen«.
»I’m married to a Danish man and plan to move to Copenhagen next summer. I originally come from Kuala Lumpur in Malaysia. This is my first time participating in Girlswalk. I came across it on Instagram two or three weeks ago but had a hard time finding the courage to go. I’m not great at making new friends«.
»What I like about the concept is that I get to meet other people who have just moved to the city. Like-minded people who maybe haven’t found friends yet either«.
»The hope is that I’ll talk to some of the women and maybe make a couple of friends over time. I haven’t talked to any of the others yet, but it will probably happen. I’m a bit shy, but as soon as someone starts talking to me, I open up. I just don’t always know how to start the conversation«.
»I’m from Poland but have lived in Taastrup for a year. This is my second time participating in a Girlswalk. Last time, I met some nice girls, and we had a lot of fun. But unfortunately, they haven’t had the opportunity to meet since, so now I’m back«.
»I don’t go out very often, so I really need some friendships. It would be nice to meet some people with the same interests as me. Or someone who wants to do something together – go to yoga, go climbing, or have a coffee«.
»But it’s not easy to make friends in the real world. I’ve tried to build relationships in different places – for example, at the gym, where I’ve tried talking to some of the girls. They haven’t been very open, and that’s okay. But it’s also a bit discouraging. At Girlswalk, many come alone, and everyone is ready for the premise. So here I feel a completely different energy«.
Clara Underdahl
