Title: Kathrine_dreams_of_a_villa_in_Hvidovre,_a_rottweiler,_and_cleaning_every_two_weeks._What_does_that_lifestyle_cost_
Date: 2025-07-30
Article Type: Edition
Author: 26-year-old Kathrine works as a back-office employee in the insurance industry. In the future, she dreams of an outdoor kitchen, a rottweiler, and cleaning help every two weeks.

Clara Underdahl
Journalist
»I dream of a s
ingle-story villa in Hvidovre
, preferably close to the beach. It’s important that the house is on one level because it’s easier to clean. The house should ideally
have four bedrooms,
and it would be wonderful to have
a garden with a large terrace
where we could build an outdoor kitchen – not only for cooking during the summer but also to clean fish. My boyfriend fishes a lot.
I imagine having
two children
. It would be delightful if they followed in my footsteps and took up
horseback riding.
That would mean we’d have to buy a pony that would stay at a riding school. I would also love to
have a dog.
The dream is a larger dog, maybe a rottweiler.
Right now, I have a car that I’m happy with. But I would like an extra one, perhaps
an Audi Q7
. It’s an SUV with plenty of space. A car you sit up in. I’m a tall girl, so it matters.
IBYEN
Dream Calculator
Copenhagen ranks
among the world’s most expensive cities to live in. Despite this, many people aspire to live their dream life right here. But is it even realistic?
Ibyen investigates
that question in this series, where a number of young Copenhageners share the life they dream of living in Copenhagen 7-10 years into the future.
Where will they live?
How will they spend their leisure time? Where will they eat, drink, and dance? All to put a price tag on the future in the city they fantasize about.
Regarding travel, I would like
to go away twice a year for about a week and a half.
It could be to
Italy.
We would fly there and then rent a car. Denmark can also be lovely in the summer. I have a speedboat license, so eventually, it would be fantastic to
have my own speedboat.
I would love to sail to different harbors and enjoy an ice cream or a good lunch. I dream of a
smaller boat that can sail fast and accommodate 5-6 people. Maybe a Bayliner.
I would mostly eat at home. When it comes to grocery shopping, I
don’t have strong preferences
– I could perfectly well shop at Føtex or Netto. Once a week, we might order takeaway, and it would be lovely if we, as a family, could go out to eat
once or twice a month.
Otherwise, I don’t have many big wishes.
It would just be to hire cleaning help that could come every two weeks.
That would be a way to pamper myself.«
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
With some luck, Kathrine can find
a single-story villa in Hvidovre that matches her dreams
for 6 million kroner, where she has to put down at least 300,000 kroner herself. If she borrows the rest, she would pay
32,495 kroner monthly after taxes in the first year.
The high payment is due to supplementing her mortgage with a bank loan. Additionally, there are property taxes of
3,712 kroner per month.
If Kathrine wants help cleaning the house every two weeks, we
found a cleaning company where the hourly rate is 349 kroner
. If the team spends three hours cleaning, it will cost
Kathrine 2,100 kroner monthly.
According to the
Financial Supervisory Authority
, parents should have between 2,500-3,500 kroner available per month per child. Two children would cost an average of 6,000 kroner monthly. According to
Hvidovre Municipality
, a nursery spot with lunch costs
4,180 kroner
, while a kindergarten spot with lunch costs
3,073 kroner monthly
. If Kathrine has one child in kindergarten and one in nursery, she gets the kindergarten price halved. Thus, the cost
for childcare spots would be approximately 5,700 kroner monthly.
If Kathrine wants to go horseback riding with her children, they could join the
Hvidovre-Avedøre Riding Club
, where
membership costs 500 kroner annually.
If she dreams of owning a horse, there is a large supply on DBA, where the average price is 25,000 kroner.
According to Hesteguide.dk
, it costs approximately 4,475 kroner monthly
to keep a horse – the price includes feed, bedding, stabling, farrier, savings for vet bills, riding school, and insurance. Additionally, Kathrine wants a dog. A rottweiler costs 7-8,000 kroner, and according to
totteland.dk,
the monthly expenses are about
550 kroner.
This covers food, insurance, equipment, and savings for vet bills.
According to
Statistics Denmark, a monthly food budget for two adults and two children is 4,470 kroner
, covering groceries and weekly takeaway. If Kathrine wants to take her family out to eat at a place like
Wokshop,
it would be around 900 kroner. Count on
1,800 kroner if the family eats out twice a month.
The dream car is an Audi Q7, which she can buy used for about 580,000 kroner according to
bilbasen.dk
.
According to Forsikring.dk
, car insurance costs an average of 6,500 kroner annually – so she can expect about
550 kroner monthly.
Kathrine dreams of a speedboat. On DBA, a Bayliner can be found for between 180,000 and 300,000 kroner. Based on figures from the Danish Sailing Union, it costs approximately
19,500 kroner annually to keep the boat seaworthy.
Kathrine dreams of vacationing in Italy. Including everything – flights for four, rental car, hotels, and meals for 1.5 weeks in Rome – she can expect to spend about 16,000 kroner. If they seek sun, warmth, and delicious pasta twice a year, they would need to set aside
about 2,700 kroner monthly.
Total monthly expenses: 60,677 kroner
»The monthly expense would probably be on the high side. But it’s interesting to see the numbers. I expected the housing to take a significant portion, but I didn’t anticipate it would make up half of the expenses. I was also aware that owning a horse would be a considerable expense. I will probably choose some alternatives to my dreams – a smaller car, a smaller house, no horse/boat. That would perhaps make it all more realistic.«
Clara Underdahl
