Title: Lars_Aagaard_can_continue_as_minister_after_close_vote
Date: 2025-04-25
Article Type: News
Author: Climate, Energy, and Utilities Minister Lars Aagaard will continue in his role, supported by a majority in Folketinget.

A majority in the Danish Parliament has confidence in Climate, Energy, and Utilities Minister Lars Aagaard of Moderaterne (A centrist party created before the last election by former Prime Minister Lars Løkke Rasmussen, M).
Context
A Rundown: Lars Aagard
Lars Aagaard (M) has faced stiff criticism for withholding information from Folketinget about massive delays and cost overruns in the expansion of the Danish electricity grid. It has since emerged that the climate minister chose to inform the top government officials and several ministries about the problems. He was involved in the decision not to issue a press release or inform the Folketinget.
In the light of this case, Aagaard faced a vote of no confidence on April 24.
This was confirmed following a vote of no confidence in Folketinget, the parliamentary chamber.
86 voted for Aagaard to continue as minister, 85 voted for his resignation, and 1 abstained.
Had a majority in Folketinget lost confidence in Aagaard, he would have been compelled to step down.
The vote was a consequence of the case where Aagaard withheld information about delays in the electricity grid from Parliament.
»I am focused on delivering results for the Danish people and the green transition. Next week, we will improve conditions for electricity customers in Denmark, make it safer, and then move forward with offshore wind, which I am very excited about,« Aagaard said after the vote.
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
Prior to the vote, it was already clear that Aagaard was protected as minister, despite the opposition’s expressed lack of confidence in him.
However, this protection had to be definitively secured through the vote, where the government’s supporting mandates physically needed to appear in the Folketings chamber to ensure Aagaard’s position.
Henrik Frandsen, the group chairman of Moderaterne (M), is pleased that there is a majority supporting Aagaard as minister. He is not worried about the future cooperation between Aagaard and the opposition, which wants the minister removed.
»I am convinced that the opposition will roll up their sleeves and be part of finding good, broad, and constructive solutions,« Frandsen said.
The government has lost its domestic political majority, but among others, three North Atlantic mandates support the government in the Aagaard case, thereby ensuring the minister’s position.
Context
A Rundown: North Atlantic Mandates
In Folketinget, the Danish parliamentary chamber, both Greenland and the Faroe Islands are allocated two parliamentary seats. These seats are allocated to ensure that the interests and perspectives of the two other autonomous territories in the Kingdom of Denmark are also represented in Danish national decision-making processes. The North Atlantic mandates participate in legislative procedures, voting and debates in Folketinget.
Currently the mandates are:
Greenland: Aaja Chemnitz (Inuit Ataqatigiit) and Aki-Matilda Høegh-Dam (Naleraq)
Faroe Islands: Anna Falkenberg (Sambandsflokkurin) and Sjúrður Skaale (Javnaðarflokkurin)
Greenland’s Aaja Chemnitz (Inuit Ataqatigiit, IA) and the two Faroese mandates in Parliament, Anna Falkenberg (Sambandsflokkurin, SP) and Sjúrður Skaale (Javnaðarflokkurin, JF), support the government in this matter. Independent Jon Stephensen also helps secure Aagaard’s ministerial role.
Another independent, Theresa Scavenius, chose to abstain – neither for nor against – during the vote.
Independents Jeppe Søe and Mike Fonseca, both formerly with Moderaterne, supported the opposition in the case.
Greenlandic Parliament member Aki-Matilda Høegh-Dam (Naleraq) had announced she would likely abstain, but her vote was not registered.
»I did not vote at all. I don’t know if it makes a difference, but I didn’t press any button,« said Aki-Matilda Høegh-Dam, who unlike the other North Atlantic mandates in Parliament, did not support the government with a vote.
Votes of no confidence in the parliamentary chamber are extremely rare. The last one was in 2006, when then Konservative (Conservative party, C) Consumer Minister Lars Barfoed survived.
Aagaard is not himself a member of Parliament. Therefore, he could not vote, although he was present in Folketinget. He was brought into the government after the 2022 election.
Before that, he was the CEO of Dansk Energi from 2009-2022. Today, he is a parliamentary candidate.
ritzau
read next
