Title: Mio's_budget_pizza_is_more_than_approved
Date: 2025-07-11
Article Type: Food
Author: High quality at a low price is an offering that has pizza boxes flying off the shelves. But does the new pizzeria on Falkoner Allé hold up under closer inspection?

High quality at a low price is an offering that has pizza boxes flying off the shelves. But does the new pizzeria on Falkoner Allé hold up under closer inspection?
Birgitte Kjær
Journalist
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
Mio is the pizza joint of food entrepreneur Torben Klitbo. The man who founded (and later sold) Cofoco has created so many restaurants and takeaway-spots that it would be impossible to list them all here.
The latest addition to Copenhagen’s ever-growing roster of budget-friendly eateries, Mio, is located by Frederiksberg Centret. It follows the trend of high-quality yet inexpensive places, much like the French-inspired bistros Bouillon (also Klitbo’s) and Le Petit Rouge.
At Mio, you can choose pizzas from a wood-fired oven for 49 or 59 kroner—prices that are 10-20 kroner less than what many competitors charge for lunch pizzas.
There are eight varieties to choose from. Four vegetarian options—margherita, potato, norma (with eggplant), and garlic cheese—and four meat options—salami, potato-bacon, minced beef, and one with ham. For dessert—as customers of the now-defunct Cofoco Le Marché delis will remember—tiramisu (21 kr).
Café Review
Mio, Falkoner Allé 17, Frb.
A lot of people. We ordered online and had to fight our way through a crowd to pick up our order. Later, we found that orders were temporarily closed due to high demand.
From a fridge, you can choose San Pellegrino sodas (19 kr), mineral water (17 kr), and Italian Peroni beers (29 kr).
Overall, very good. With a wood-fired oven that can get blisteringly hot, the protein structure breaks down and forms new bonds, making the pizza elastic, the crust crispy and golden, and giving it a slightly caramelized flavor. It’s not dalmatian-spotted like a Neapolitan would want, but it’s definitely approved.
The quality of the toppings is also top-notch. The tomato sauce is intense and smells like summer vacation. The capricciosa’s ham is sliced silk-thin but packs flavor, and the salami’s temperament is balanced by melted mozzarella.
That being said, you can tell they’re cutting back on some of the good ingredients. The mushrooms are sliced so thin they’re more decorative than flavorful; there are only nine small pieces of eggplant on the norma, and the variant with mozzarella, parmesan, parsley, and garlic oil has so little on top it resembles more of a flatbread than a pizza. And what happened to the salty ricotta that tasted like grated eraser?
Generally, the taste is fine, but when the toppings are sparse, there’s a lot of crust. We found ourselves dreaming of crust dip.
Mio’s pizzas have a diameter of 27 centimeters and sit lightly in the stomach. Both because of the limited toppings and because they’re not greasy. So many will have room for the tiramisu (21 kr), which isn’t heavy with mascarpone but light as cream, with only hints of coffee and amaretto. Gentle and kid-friendly, though the chocolate chips that add crunch could be done without. And check your cup before you leave Mio; one of ours was completely frozen.
Mio doesn’t deliver, and there’s no space to eat your pizza at the venue. But you can take your pizza box next door to Bootleggers and eat it there if you buy drinks.
If you’re heading to Falkoner Bio and want a bite to eat on the steps before the movie, or if you’re planning to look at blooming bulbs in Landbohøjskolens Have, Mio is a great place to stock up on a budget.
The low prices are unbeatable, so the slightly sparse presentation is hard to be angry about. On the contrary, you can appreciate that Mio’s pizzas don’t land like cannonballs in your stomach.
Mio runs a lovely, simple concept with really low prices. It’s easy to understand. There’s no wow factor, but you can taste that the ingredients are quality. A good place to know for everyday use. It smells like a chain.
Birgitte Kjær
