Title: Of_course,_you_should_go_hiking_this_summer,_and_here_are_5_routes_you_should_consider
Date: 2025-07-21
Article Type: Culture
Author: Gunhild Riske, journalist and anthropologist, author of the books ’Vandreruter ved havet i Danmark’ (Hiking Trails by the Sea in Denmark) and ’Danmarks smukkeste vandreruter’ (Denmark’s Most Beautiful Hiking Trails), guides you to five of the finest hiking routes in the country.

Sune Højrup Bencke
Journalist
Nymindegab, the North Sea:
»Seven kilometers long with beach, forest, and meadow areas. Start at the parking lot at Nymindegab. Here you can be blown away by a wide sandy beach with endless skies and the scent of salt. You can find ray egg capsules and white cuttlebone from cuttlefish. After three kilometers, there’s a lifeguard station. Here, you turn left into the dune landscape, crossing Gammelgab, which is a series of small lakes. At the top of the hill, take the yellow trail to the left into the pine forest, Nyminde Plantation, which is part of a red deer reserve. When there are red deer, there can also be wandering wolves. Typically, you won’t see them, but I think it’s interesting to know they’re there. On the way back, you can visit the viewpoint Hattebjerget«.
Hov Vig, northwest Zealand:
»By Hov Vig on Zealand, there’s an 11-kilometer route that goes through a fjord landscape. Close to Nykøbing Sjælland and not far from Rørvig near Isefjord. There are many wetlands here, making it a place with many birds – from the majestic sea eagle to larks and lapwings. There are also meadows, juniper heath, and a young forest. And there’s an old village environment in Nakke, which has beautiful farms, a village school, and a smithy. You get the feeling that village life here has been rather tough. In the actual inlet, there can be many geese. And if they take off with a roar in a flock of many hundreds, it’s because the sea eagle is hunting«.
The Panoramic route, Mariager Fjord:
»10 kilometers and clearly marked. You don’t need to worry about finding your way, just use your energy to walk and experience. There are several different types of landscapes along the way. The outward journey begins along the fjord edge from the marina in Hobro. You’ll encounter a heathland landscape with grassy hills intersected by ravines. You’ll come across a moist meadow area and a small stream that flows into the fjord. Then you’ll reach Bramslev Bakker with tall juniper bushes and a stunning view over the fjord environment«.
Tåsinge, the South Funen Archipelago:
»On Tåsinge in the South Funen Archipelago, there’s a small seven-kilometer route that goes from the skipper town Troense down to Nørreskoven along the coast, where the beech forest reflects in the sea, past Valdemar’s Castle, and back again along the back side of the castle. Troense is very charming with a harbor and a well-preserved cultural environment with beautiful, old, and long gardens that are teeming with fruit trees. Behind the charming facade lies a brutal history. For in 1750, the estate owner of Valdemar’s Castle forced the tenant farmers to have only fruit gardens in long parcels so that fruit could be exported in large quantities from the harbor. You also pass the castle, which unfortunately is no longer open to the public«.
The cliff path at Almindingen on Bornholm:
»A dramatic cliff walk of just under six kilometers. But also an incredibly beautiful hike in one of the few areas in Denmark where you can see the bedrock. It’s a physically demanding hike, so you shouldn’t have sore legs or poor balance. The route begins at the parking lot of Ekkodalen in Almindingen and initially passes high cliff walls and marshes, until it climbs steeply with views of heather, lichen, and moss. On the way down, you pass the Gamleborg ruins from the Viking Age. Here, you might be lucky enough to hear the ravens call. It’s very atmospheric. Along the hiking route, it’s also possible to see cranes and hear the nightingale«.
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
Sune Højrup Bencke
