Title: Rufus_Gifford_on_unusual_access_to_public_records_»I've_never_seen_anything_like_this_before«
Date: 2025-08-21
Article Type: News
Author: Former U.S. Ambassador Rufus Gifford is alarmed by a request for all embassy communications about Trump and Greenland.

Former U.S. Ambassador Rufus Gifford is alarmed by a request for all embassy communications about Trump and Greenland.
Jacob Fuglsang
USA-korrespondent
Claus Blok Thomsen
Nordisk korrespondent
Anders Tornsø Jørgensen
Journalist
Former U.S. Ambassador to Denmark Rufus Gifford is outraged that approximately 30 employees at the U.S. Embassy in Copenhagen and the U.S. Consulate in Nuuk were ordered in June to hand over all documents and written communications about Donald Trump and his ambition to acquire Greenland that they had written or received over a three-month period.
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
»This feels like a purge campaign,« said Gifford, who served as ambassador to Denmark under Barack Obama from 2013 to 2017 and later became chief of protocol at the U.S. Department of State under Joe Biden.
In that latter role, he had overarching responsibility for diplomatic formalities during state visits and when the President traveled internationally.
»I have never seen anything like this,« he added.
As Politiken previously reported, the order to hand over the politically sensitive material came directly from the U.S. Department of State in Washington. The request follows a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request from the highly conservative American organization Judicial Watch.
The handed-over material was to be sent to the U.S. Department of State in Washington, which would then pass it on to Judicial Watch after processing it according to U.S. FOIA regulations.
Facts
Summary of the case
Politiken has obtained
a series of internal emails describing how the U.S. State Department in Washington received a public records request concerning communications among staff at the U.S. Embassy in Copenhagen and the U.S. Consulate in Nuuk about topics including Greenland and Donald Trump.
The emails Politiken obtained
did not reveal who had sent the request.
Therefore, Politiken submitted
a public records request to the U.S. State Department to find out who had made the request targeting the embassy and consulate. This week, the U.S. State Department sent a copy of the request, revealing that the sender is the organization Judicial Watch.
Meanwhile
, through research and its own sources, Politiken has mapped out the network of individuals actively working to realize Trump’s plans for Greenland. See the profile gallery in the article.
The order included not only internal working documents but also anything employees might have written in text messages, chat messages, and social media posts—even from their private accounts on platforms like WhatsApp. According to the U.S. Department of State, the order was justified by a FOIA request the department had received.
»This feels a bit more politically targeted,« Gifford said, noting that such requests typically come from journalists:
»This does not feel like people trying to serve the public interest.«
Even though Rufus Gifford emphasizes that he does not want to comment on Judicial Watch or the reasons behind the FOIA request, he says that it rather resembles a »political loyalty test than anything else« and aims to spread fear.
»The idea behind this is that if you refuse to hand over your personal devices and share the information on, for example, your phone, it could be grounds for dismissal. Therefore, the fear is that you either cooperate—or risk losing your job,« he said, pointing to right-wing activist Laura Loomer as one of the people Trump uses to target political opponents.
»One of the particularly unheard-of things about Donald Trump is that he uses citizens like Laura Loomer to identify and fire disloyal people in the administration. I have never seen this before, and it is an extremely unfortunate way for a president to act.«
Both Danish and American experts are puzzled by the extensive nature of the handover requirement.
»I cannot remember ever having to hand over text messages or Signal chats, WhatsApp messages, and the like. I do not remember that,« Gifford said.
The requested material covered the period from October 1 through January 7 of this year, when Trump’s son, Donald Trump Jr., visited Nuuk in Greenland.
In addition to Trump’s ambitions to acquire Greenland, the handover order also included documents about his son’s visit and all emails from the relevant period that were either sent to or received from the U.S. Consul in Nuuk, Monica Bland, and contained the term ’Trump.’ This is according to a series of internal emails obtained by Politiken.
Documentation
What the employees were required to hand over
»All documents
related to the proposed purchase or acquisition of Greenland territory by the USA. This request includes, but is not limited to, all related diplomatic communications (cables/teletypes) and emails sent or received by any official or employee at the U.S. Embassy in Copenhagen or the U.S. Consulate in Nuuk.«
»All documents
regarding the visit to Greenland in January 2025 by Donald Trump Jr.«
»All emails
sent to or received from the U.S. Consul in Nuuk, Monica Bland, containing »the term ’Trump,’« except for documents that solely contain media reports or press clippings.«
»Emails in languages other than English
(for example, Danish or Greenlandic). For Monica specifically, since the department’s centralized review includes media, item 3 of the request should only apply to non-English emails you may have sent or received.«
»Calendars.«
»Personal drives
, office-shared drives, and cloud-based drives.«
»Electronic messages
currently housed on platforms like WhatsApp, SMS messages, etc. (
whether
the platform is on a personal or department-issued device).«
»Social media posts
and other records.«
»Other department
databases (where applicable). For example, ClassNet emails and devices other than diplomatic cables.«
According to Gifford, this is a deeply concerning development that could harm American interests if employees end up losing their jobs at the Embassy in Copenhagen or the Consulate in Nuuk because they expressed critical views regarding Trump’s desire to acquire Greenland.
»To me, this is exactly what they are hired to do: to express concerns to their superiors about the absurdity of such demands—and explain why. And if someone actually loses their job on that basis, it completely undermines American foreign policy and diplomacy. And that is a shame.«
»Am I surprised? Not at all,« said Gifford, who believes that the most important role for diplomats at an embassy is to provide their advice and guidance to their superiors.
Since Trump’s inauguration, thousands of employees have been fired across various U.S. departments, agencies, and authorities. Meanwhile, Tulsi Gabbard, who heads the U.S. intelligence agencies, has established an internal working group aimed at investigating whether employees in the agencies are loyal to the Trump administration.
Biography
Rufus Gifford
Born in 1974
in Massachusetts, USA. He has an academic background in theater studies and American studies from Brown University and began his career in the film industry in Los Angeles.
He started his political career
working on John Kerry’s presidential campaign in 2004. In 2008, he was a senior advisor in Barack Obama’s campaign and served as finance director for his re-election campaign in 2012. From 2013 to 2017, Gifford was the U.S. Ambassador to Denmark.
In April 2020
, he joined Joe Biden’s campaign as deputy campaign manager responsible for fundraising. After Biden’s victory, he was appointed Chief of Protocol at the U.S. State Department and later became finance director for Kamala Harris’ campaign.
Gifford believes the development is deeply absurd. He points out that as ambassador, he had several Republican colleagues who celebrated Trump’s election victory in 2016:
»I never had the feeling that they could not perform their work professionally and effectively.«
He argues that the Trump administration’s war against the American civil service is reminiscent of U.S. Senator Joe McCarthy, who led a witch hunt against suspected communists in the American civil service in the 1950s.
»There is no doubt that loyalty tests are currently taking place throughout the U.S. government.«
Anders Tornsø Jørgensen
read next
Stærkt konservativ organisation står bag spektakulær begæring om aktindsigt. USA’s tidligere ambassadør i Danmark trækker også i trådene
Usædvanlig aktindsigt tvinger ansatte på USA's ambassade i Danmark til at udlevere private e-mails
Amerikansk juraprofessor:
»Der findes ingen historiske fortilfælde for denne grad af granskning«
