Title: The_world’s_easiest_meal_Rice_porridge_that_doesn’t_burn
Date: 2025-12-11
Article Type: Food
Author: December means rice porridge. Wrap the pot in a heavy duvet to finish cooking: it’s greener, saves electricity, and prevents burning.

December means rice porridge. Wrap the pot in a heavy duvet to finish cooking: it’s greener, saves electricity, and prevents burning.
Mette Mølbak
Madredaktør
Food Advent Calendar
24 Christmas recipes for you
Here is a selected Christmas recipe for each day in December, guaranteed to bring joy to your kitchen. Find all the recipes
here
.
Behind the recipe
Mette Mølbak
Mette Mølbak
is the food editor at Politiken.
Her mission is
to spread the joy of green cuisine and demonstrate how flavorful and rewarding plant-based cooking can be.
She is the author
of several cookbooks, including ’Kål’ and most recently ’Sommerhusmad’.
Rice pudding is a December classic. Loved by many. Hated by few.
Rice pudding may not be the most nutritious meal, but it is probably the easiest dinner in the world if you follow this method my mother taught me, where the rice pudding cooks under a duvet. When I was a child, it was always exciting to see if my bed would be chosen to cook the rice pudding. It always was.
The method is the old-fashioned haybox method, where the food continues to cook without using electricity. Here, the haybox is replaced with a blanket and a duvet, and the advantage is that, besides saving energy, you avoid the pudding burning.
This portion serves two adults and two small children. If there are more of you or you are extra hungry, just multiply the quantities.
Kitchen time: 5-10 minutes
Cooking time: 1 hour (during which you can do all sorts of other things)
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
200 ml pudding rice
1 liter milk (preferably whole milk)
Tip:
The Danish Veterinary and Food Administration recommends not leaving rice pudding under a duvet/in a haybox for more than 1 hour, as harmful bacteria can develop, which in the worst case can cause vomiting and diarrhea.
Mette Mølbak
read next
Verdens nemmeste måltid:
Risengrød, der ikke brænder på
24 juleopskrifter til dig
Søde, krydrede, sprøde og knasende:
Madredaktørens bud på julens bedste brunkager
