Title: Three_dead_after_shooting_in_swedish_city_–_Suspect_fled_on_electric_scooter
Date: 2025-04-30
Article Type: News
Author: A large police operation has been underway in the Swedish city of Uppsala following a shooting that killed three people.

A large police operation has been underway in the Swedish city of Uppsala following a shooting that killed three people.
Fiona Fälling
Journalist
Karoline Fogh Lassen
Journalist
Updated Wednesday at 07:30
Three people have been killed as a result of gunfire in the Swedish city of Uppsala. This has been confirmed by Swedish police to
Upsala Nya Tidning.
»We are investigating murder. We have three people who have been shot and killed. We have many resources at work and are in the process of getting an idea of what has happened«, said police spokesperson Magnus Jansson Klarin on Tuesday.
A manhunt is underway for a suspect who reportedly fled on an electric scooter.
Police were still present at the crime scene until shortly before five o’clock Wednesday morning, according to Swedish media
SVT
.
Furthermore, according to the media’s information one of the deceased individuals was involved in the investigation of another planned attack. The target there was a relative of gang leader Ismail Abdo.
As of Wednesday morning, Swedish police have yet to make any arrests.
»At this moment, we do not wish to provide further comments on a potential description to avoid influencing witnesses. Anyone who has seen something or has information is kindly asked to contact us«, said Maria Hall, press officer for the Swedish police, Tuesday evening.
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
The shots were fired outside a hair salon, and police have been knocking on doors in the area. According to the police, they are working to identify the deceased, and relatives have not been informed.
The police report that they received calls from citizens who said they heard loud bangs that sounded like gunfire in the city center, prompting a large police response.
A witness, on their way to shop at the supermarket Ica, saw the suspected shooter on an electric scooter shortly before the shooting incident.
»I saw him come around a corner, and then shots started ringing.«
The witness ran to Uppsala Concert and Congress Center to hide.
»You panic. After a while, I went back to the crime scene, and the square was in total chaos.«
A Swedish citizen standing by police barricades at around 9 PM reported that his relatives were at the crime scene but that he has not heard from them.
»It is the worst feeling«, he told
Upsala Nya Tidning
.
The first emergency call came shortly after 5 PM, wrote the Swedish news agency TT.
Police have cordoned off a large area around Vaksala Square and initiated what they call a ’special event’ in connection with the shootings. They announced this on
their website
. The expression ’special event’ is used by Swedish police when they call in extra resources from other parts of Sweden due to extra needs.
Sweden’s Minister of Justice, Gunnar Strömmer, said Tuesday to the news agency TT that a »brutal act of violence has taken place in central Uppsala«.
»The Ministry of Justice is in close contact with the police and is monitoring the situation closely«, said the minister in a statement.
Karoline Fogh Lassen
