Title: Today,_many_Danes_can_look_forward_to_checking_their_bank_accounts
Date: 2025-04-25
Article Type: News
Author: On Friday, the Danish Tax Agency will disburse 25.4 billion kroner to Danes who have overpaid their taxes in 2024.

Lukas Lau Nielsen
On Friday, 3.8 million Danes can expect to receive their tax refunds.
Thus, the vast majority of Danish taxpayers will receive money back, the Danish Tax Agency writes in a press release.
More than 82 percent of Danes are entitled to a refund, and the Danish Tax Agency will disburse a total of 25.4 billion kroner.
On average, this means that each Dane who is due a refund will receive 6,621 kroner.
It is the impression of the Minister for Taxation, Rasmus Stoklund (S), that most Danes prefer to err on the side of caution and pay a bit too much in taxes.
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
»Even though it’s the Danes’ own money that they are now getting back, I think most people find it comforting when the number is green.«
»Ideally, it would be best if one had a reasonable control over one’s preliminary tax assessment and neither overpaid nor underpaid taxes, ensuring a correct payout of the money needed throughout the year,« said the minister.
People in the Capital Region receive the highest refunds, according to figures from the Danish Tax Agency. On average, those due a refund will receive 7,100 kroner.
The Southern Denmark Region has the lowest average refund at 6,315 kroner.
Since March, it has been possible to view one’s annual tax statement for 2024 and thus determine whether one has overpaid or underpaid taxes.
Almost 800,000 citizens have underpaid taxes. They collectively owe 7.8 billion kroner in back taxes.
Most of those entitled to a refund will receive their tax overpayment on Friday.
However, this does not apply to citizens who have debts to the public sector.
Since 2019, the Debt Collection Agency has been able to collect debts by withholding tax refunds.
Over five years, the agency has collected around 20 billion kroner.
»I am very pleased that the Debt Collection Agency has the ability to recover public sector debts by withholding tax refunds. It is entirely fair that debts are repaid in this manner,« said Minister for Taxation Rasmus Stoklund.
ritzau
