Title: What_do_international_voters_dream_of_»I_think_Lynetteholmen_is_bad_for_the_environment«
Date: 2025-11-14
Article Type: News
Author: A record number foreigners will be able to vote in this year’s municipal and regional elections. We asked three of them which election issues are most important to them.

A record number foreigners will be able to vote in this year’s municipal and regional elections. We asked three of them which election issues are most important to them.
Sara Vorre Rothstein
Journalist
They pour your latte in Copenhagen, they study at the universities, they are your neighbors, colleagues, and fellow citizens - and some of them dream of living in Denmark for the rest of their lives.
Around half a million foreigners have the right to vote in the upcoming municipal election. Only about a third of international voters cast a ballot in the last election, but they could be decisive this time. What kind of Copenhagen do they dream of? And why does voting matter to them?
Politiken has asked three international voters what they are voting for and where they stand on the city’s big issues.
»The environment is something that also worried me in my home country. And this is my home now, so I think it’s important. If there are more green spaces with parks, I think it’s good for the mental health, because kids can go there, retired people can go, and people like me who work can go there to feel more calm. It creates community. I know it’s a hot topic whether there should be more or fewer parking spots, but I think that the large number of cars and the heavy traffic take up too much space and affect the air badly«.
»I’ve never taken voting for granted. Spain is a relatively young democracy in Europe, so I know from my grandparents what it means not to have the right to vote. Voting is a way to make my opinion heard, and I think we can change and improve and achieve things through voting. Most of us immigrants cannot vote in the general election. Instead, we can change things in our neighborhood, start from there«.
Facts
International voters
It is estimated
that around 480,000 people without Danish citizenship will be eligible to vote in the upcoming election.
In Copenhagen
, it is expected that around 20 percent of eligible voters are non-Danish citizens.
You are
eligible to vote if you:
In the last local election in 2021, voter turnout among foreign citizens was 29.1 percent.
Sources:
Momentum
,
KL
and
University of Copenhagen
»I recently went to a debate to learn more about the election themes. I also read the news in Danish. I feel like some of the politicians differentiate what they say to Danish voters compared to what they say to us. Some of the parties on the right spectrum talk really positively about us when they meet us, but I know that what they say in Danish media is less positive. That’s why I tell my friends to not just read the news in English, but also check the news in Danish and translate it«.
»I dream of a Copenhagen for everyone. A place for people to live no matter their background, culture, religion, or social class. A city where you don’t have to worry about pollution or being pushed out of the neighborhoods by the high housing prices«.
»I want to live in Denmark for as long as I can and possibly for the rest of my life. I’m learning Danish, but it has been refreshing to see that some of the election posters are in English and other languages. It makes me feel included«.
»I think Lynetteholmen is bad for the environment, and it won’t solve the current housing crisis since it won’t take effect until 2070. It’s becoming more and more expensive to live in Copenhagen, and it’s hard for a regular person to get a place to live. When I moved from Roskilde to Copenhagen, it took me five months to get an apartment. Now I’m looking for a new place with my Danish partner, and it’s super difficult to find something affordable«.
»I believe that if I’m living here, I have the right to have a say on what’s going on in the city. I also feel I have a personal and moral duty to vote«.
»My dream vision for Copenhagen is without cars, and where everyone has the right to live in the city. Not in the city center itself, but spread out in the city. Copenhagen is a nice and calm city. I hope it stays this way«.
»My dad’s grandfather was Danish and moved to Haiti, so I have some Danish roots. I moved to Denmark in 2008. When people ask me about my nationality, I say I am a blending of Haiti, France and Denmark«.
»I’m a member of the political party Moderaterne. It makes me feel more included and helps me practice my Danish. Some internationals feel they’re not part of the society, but I think internationals have so much to bring«.
»It’s true that in Denmark, you have many political parties. It’s a bit difficult for a foreigner to understand. But if you understand the Danish political system, then you will understand the Danish society better. The internationals represent 10 percent of the voters in Denmark, so they can influence politics in a major way. It can only enrich the Danish society«.
»Right now, I’m in between jobs, so I would wish it was easier to get a job as a foreigner in Denmark. This is where you can grow your talent. This is where you spend most of your time. And it also brings financial security«.
»I like that there’s a lot of green areas in Frederiksberg. One thing I don’t like is that our mayor has raised the taxes. We pay more taxes than Copenhagen, and I would like that to change. Because honestly, I don’t see how my life has become better«.
Sara Vorre Rothstein
read next
