Title: Where_can_you_find_the_most_authentic_Italian_dinner_in_Copenhagen_We_ask_eight_Italians_-_politiken.dk
Date: 2025-04-23
Article Type: Clara Underdahl
Author: Politiken asked eight Italians living here where they go in Copenhagen and its surrounding areas when they miss Italy

W
e are obsessed with Italy. People drink negroni as if it were Ribena, wear Italian football jerseys, and say ’allora!’ even though their primary Italian connection is Supermarco in Sydhavnen.
And we are eating Italian food like never before.
Copenhagen’s menus are overflowing with primi, secondi, and dolci, and every other week, a new osteria/trattoria/spiseria opens. But the multitude of choices can also make it hard to navigate when you’re trying to book a table.
This article was originally published in Danish. It has been translated with the help of AI and subsequently proofread by a member of the editorial staff.
Read more about how to
subscribe to Politiken Edition here
Where should you go when you daydream about spaghetti alle vongole? Or long for a sfogliatella that takes you back to warm summer mornings in Naples?
Ibyen reaches out to some of the city’s unofficial experts—eight Copenhageners with Italian roots—and asks for their advice. Where do they go to eat when they miss the food from their homeland? And what do they order?
Works as a bike courier for the company By-Expressen, 32 years old.
Which region are you from?
»I am from Lazio in central Italy, where we have many delicious ingredients. My favorites are Roman artichokes and pecorino. The dish I love the most is called pomodori con riso, which consists of baked tomatoes filled with rice and cooked together with potatoes.«
It’s precisely the place I want to go when I want to forget how far I am from home
Desiré Alfredo
Where do you go in Copenhagen when you miss an authentic Italian meal? And what do you order?
»When I feel homesick, I need a real Italian trattoria. Nothing fancy—no natural wine, no sourdough bread—just good food and friendly service. My favorite place is La Vecchia Signora. It’s located on Grønnegade, very touristy, but it’s exactly the place I want to go when I want to forget how far I am from home.«
»I usually order bruschetta with olive oil and tomatoes. If it’s summer, also some prosciutto and melon. Afterwards, I’d have a marinara pizza, and for dessert, their tartufo, a store-bought ice cream you can find in many pizzerias and low-profile restaurant menus. You can also ask to have it with an espresso on top—a perfect affogato to end the meal.«
Gallerist, 32 years old.
Which region are you from?
»I am from Campania, which is in southwest Italy. We are probably best known for Neapolitan pizza, which has almost achieved cult status. But we also have other culinary traditions with lots of healthy and seasonal ingredients. A traditional dish, for example, is pasta e patate—pasta with potatoes. Or dishes like pasta e lenticchie and pasta e fagioli, which are pasta dishes with lentils or beans.«
Where do you go in Copenhagen when you miss an authentic Italian meal? And what do you order?
»It’s hard to pick one favorite place. The selection and quality of Italian food are high in Copenhagen. What I look for is authenticity—smaller eateries where everything is homemade and local ingredients are used. Places that remind me of my upbringing and home region. I like Jazzed on Grains on Nørrebro on Rådmandsgade. A small place that is only open for lunch.«
»It’s essentially a sort of open pasta laboratory where you can see their machines and watch them make fresh pasta, and there is one large table where you can sit and eat. It’s not a typical Italian place. They combine several culinary traditions—southern European ingredients and Danish produce. But they primarily serve pasta. The menu depends on what they find at the market and what’s in season, so be prepared to be surprised.«
Italian teacher, 65 years old.
Which region are you from?
»I come from the Veneto region in northeastern Italy. My hometown is Padova. One thing we are known for is Aperol. It actually originates from Padova and came about in 1919. The name Aperol comes from the word aperitivo. Back then, they wanted to create an aperitivo that wasn’t too strong so that the ladies could also join in. And yes, it ended up being a huge success.«
Italians run the kitchen there. I know because I often test those who stand in the different restaurants
Marina Salmaso
Where do you go in Copenhagen when you miss an authentic Italian meal? And what do you order?
»Famo, which has three restaurants on Vesterbro, Østerbro, and Frederiksberg. They have some fantastic homemade dishes. Nothing too minimalist, which I like. I always go for their menus. I think the large ones, with four to five courses, cost around 500 kroner. You get a primo, which is always something with pasta or risotto. After that, you get fish or meat and some side dishes, and then you finish with dessert.«
»I would also recommend Ma Me Mi near Istedgade. Italians run the kitchen there. I know because I oftentest the staff in different restaurants. I start speaking Italian to them, and if they respond, we chat a bit. At Ma Me Mi, they have good antipasti but also really good pizzas with potatoes and rosemary and mortadella and pistachio.«
Studies physics at the University of Copenhagen, 22 years old.
Which region are you from?
»I grew up in Umbria—the region known as the green heart of Italy and the birthplace of sausage and charcuterie. There is a deep tradition of norcineria—the art of making sausages.«
They make all their food gluten-free, which is a huge plus since I have celiac disease
Leonora Misciattelli
Where do you go in Copenhagen when you miss an authentic Italian meal? And what do you order?
»When I want to eat something authentic Italian in Copenhagen, I go to Il Grappolo Blu or their sister restaurant Osteria Alfredo on Vesterbro. Run by the sweetest Italian owners, they serve slightly more playful Italian food with a little twist on the otherwise very traditional Italian cuisine. Additionally, they make all their food gluten-free, which is a huge plus since I have celiac disease.«
»Il Grappolo Blu always has some fun seasonal dishes. Their tartare gets new accompaniments every now and then, and I can warmly recommend it. At Osteria Alfredo, I would order a calzone. It’s rare to find one gluten-free that tastes incredibly good.«
»If you’re on a budget, I also recommend Trattoria Luca in Lyngby. It is a place with authentic Italian food and Italian kitchen staff and managers. They serve, among other things, antipasto misto—a plate with a mix of appetizers.«
Pianist and piano teacher, 30 years old.
Which region are you from?
»I come from the Veneto region. We are well-known for radicchio di Treviso—a slightly bitter salad that tastes amazing. We use it in risotto, among other dishes. Another specialty is baccalà, salted cod. My family is from Venice, and there, we use a lot of fish and shellfish. I vividly remember my grandfather standing in the kitchen, making risotto or spaghetti alle vongole. He was a fantastic cook.«
In summer, I love to order their spaghetti vongole, and later in the year, I recommend their rabbit ragout
Marco Pomelli
Where do you go in Copenhagen when you miss an authentic Italian meal? And what do you order?
»For an authentic Italian meal, I always recommend eating at home in relaxed surroundings with friends and family. But when I do want to go out, I go to Mastro in Hellerup. When I step in, it feels like stepping into a restaurant in Italy. I love living in Denmark and Copenhagen, but sometimes I miss the Italian atmosphere and vibe. You get that there.«
»You must try their vitello tonnato-slices of veal with a tuna sauce and fried capers on top. It might sound a bit strange, but it works. Another dish I order is their carpaccio, thinly sliced beef filet with arugula and parmigiano topped with balsamic vinegar. Their menu changes depending on the season, but in summer, I love to order their spaghetti vongole, and later in the year, I recommend their rabbit ragout.«
Engineer at Rambøll, 30 years old.
Which region are you from?
»I come from Milan, which is in Lombardy in northern Italy. A very traditional dish is risotto with saffron, also known as risotto alla Milanese. We have several dishes in Milan that take quite a bit of time. Among others, we have a Christmas cake called panettone, which is quite complex to make.«
Where do you go in Copenhagen when you miss an authentic Italian meal? And what do you order?
»I aim to try one new Italian place in Copenhagen every week. I’m good at making pasta, but when it comes to pizza, I’m not an expert. So it’s often something I order when I’m out. In this context, I always look for whether the place has a stone oven. That’s definitely a plus.«
»I’ve found one place that gives me the feeling of being home in Italy. It’s called Leo and is on Vesterbrogade. It’s very small; the owner is from Sicily and has lived in Copenhagen for 40 years. When I visited Leo for the first time, the owner sat down at my table, and we started chatting. It was like being back in Italy—especially in the south, where people often sit down and start talking to those around them.«
»But generally, I don’t focus too much on the nationality of the restaurant owners. In fact, one of my favorite pizzerias in Italy is run by a Chinese family, and the pizzaiolo is Egyptian. My focus is always on the taste and quality of the food. I mostly eat vegetarian, so at Leo, I order their vegetarian pizzas. I also want to try their arancino, which is a fried rice ball. Additionally, they have a popular vegetarian pasta dish from Sicily that I’m considering ordering next time, pasta alla norma, which consists of pasta with fried aubergine, salted ricotta, and tomato sauce.«
Studies African studies at the University of Copenhagen, 26 years old.
Which region are you from?
»I come from the small town of Amelia in the Umbria region. When it comes to food, we specialize in meat. There are quite a few farmers in town—they make dried sausages, which we often eat as an aperitivo. Furthermore, many go hunting, so we also eat rabbits, pigeons, and other birds. Traditional dishes include faraona arrosto, roast guinea fowl with herbs, and pasta chinghiale, where we use wild boar. We also have a traditional dessert called fichi girotti, which are dried figs filled with chocolate.«
Where do you go in Copenhagen when you miss an authentic Italian meal? And what do you order?
»Food is like art to us Italians. There is a lot of dignity associated with it, and the culture is that you always cook at home. So we only eat out when we want to treat ourselves.«
We tend to trust other Italians
Sofia Corsano
»When I want pizza, I visit Pizzeria Luca at Gammel Strand. They serve Naples-style pizzas and follow the Italian concept—the smaller, the better. Additionally, they also have Italian beers. When I’m there, I order their pizza patate e salsiccia.«
»Another pizza place I love is C’ho Fame in Larsbjørnsstræde, which makes Rome-inspired pizzas. Many Italians eat there, and those who work there are from Italy. That’s why we go there—we generally trust other Italians. I like their arugula pizza with ham and small tomatoes.«
»Il Mattarello is a stand in Torvehallerne that I visit when I want pasta or other dishes. An Italian runs it, and all the chefs are Italian. They serve really good homemade food, and I love their carbonara.«
»One last place I want to mention is V’italian on Gråbrødretorv. An Italian restaurant that makes vegan food. It’s quite difficult, but they are really creative. In my opinion, they make some of the best focaccia in Copenhagen, and I really like their tiramisu.«
Curator at KØS - Museum for Art in Public Spaces, 37 years old.
Which region are you from?
»I was born and raised in Poggibonsi, a small town in Tuscany, located between Siena and Florence. My parents’ house is on the outskirts of the town, two minutes’ walk from where the famous road to the villages Castellina and Gaiole begins.  In Tuscany, it’s part of your upbringing to know which vegetables are in season when, and because of the mild winters and warm summers, I grew up eating green beans, all sorts of salads, large tomatoes—we call them cuore di bue (ox heart)—artichokes, zucchini with flowers, eggplant, and fennel.«
It’s simply the best gelato spot, and it has a lovely atmosphere
Irene Campolmi
»In my family, it was my grandmothers who made us lunch every day after school because my parents were at work all day. My maternal grandmother’s specialty was homemade gnocchi with pomarola—a classic tomato sauce made the previous summer with fresh tomatoes—and fennel parmigiana. She would first coat fennel pieces in breadcrumbs, then fry them in scorching oil. It was delicious!«
»My paternal grandmother had a completely different menu. When I was little, she served deep-fried cow brain—a dish which in fairy tales made the little children smarter. We also had fried chicken with potatoes whenever we wanted, but also bread-based dishes like pappa al pomodoro (a bread soup with tomato sauce) and panzanella (a cold bread dish with cucumber, red onion, basil, and fresh tomatoes, topped with vinegar and olive oil). Her signature dishes, however, were lasagna and vitello tonnato, a classic.«
Where do you go in Copenhagen when you miss an authentic Italian meal? And what do you order?
»I go to Mangia, an Italian classic in Copenhagen. It has been around for a long time, but the quality and selection never disappoint me. But there are also new good places, such as Casamadre on Tagensvej, which has a really good peposo—a dish we eat at Christmas, consisting of beef braised in red wine with peppercorns and served with mashed potatoes.«
»There is also Calma in Jægersborggade, which serves a delicious tuna in bagna cauda with pistachios. Bagna cauda is a dip with anchovies, garlic, and olive oil. Finally, there’s Bar Poldo, a lovely wine bar in the city center that has some delightful food tastings.«
»Unfortunately, I was diagnosed with severe gluten allergy 12 years ago, and it meant I had to stop eating wheat and grains with gluten. So I can’t recommend any restaurant’s pasta dishes. But I love places like Graziano for their family-style vibes.«
»As any proud Italian, I also love gelato, whether it’s sunny or a classic gray Copenhagen day. Whenever I have the chance, I stop by Siciliansk Is at Skjolds Plads on my way home to Nordvest. It’s simply the best gelato spot, and it has a lovely atmosphere. The queue outside proves that it hasn’t disappointed anyone yet. I also recommend Aurora Ismageri near Søndermarken, which has delicious lactose-free ice cream.«
Tekst:
Clara Underdahl
Foto:
Lars Hansen, AP Photo, freepik og s
creenshot fra filmen ’An American in Rome’
Digital tilrettelæggelse og illustrationer:
Kira Bube
Redigering:
Louise Skov Andersen
Korrektur:
Sidsel From
Redaktør:
Morten Hjortshøj
Som abonnent kan du ubegrænset dele artikler med dine venner og familie. Læs mere om fordelene ved et abonnement
her
.
