Title: How_to_Respond_to_the_Coronavirus
Date: 2020-03-09
Article Type: Internationalt
Author: These are the updated guidelines from the Danish authorities on how citizens in Denmark should prevent new coronavirus infections.

Jakob Haff
Hygiene
Wash your hands often or use a hand disinfectant. Cough or sneeze into your sleeve, not into your hands. Coronavirus can be transmitted through droplets from coughing and sneezing and through body contact.
Avoid close contact
Avoid handshaking, cheek-kissing, and hugging – and limit any physical contact. Keep a distance in company of other people.​​
Train/metro
It is recommended that use of public transport is limited.
Elderly and sick citizens
More vulnerable citizens like the elderly and the sick should consider avoiding public transportation. Having relatives or neighbours do the shopping could be advisable.
Crowds
Public gatherings of more than 10 people are banned. Places like restaurants and gyms are to stay closed for the time being in order to curb the spread of coronavirus.
Call your doctor by telephone
If you fall ill it is important that you call your doctor by phone instead of showing up in the doctor’s waiting room as you might infect others with the new coronavirus. Outside opening hours you should call the emergency medical service (lægevagten) or the emergency phone (akuttelefonen).
Travelling
Travellers can enter Denmark if they are Danish citizens, if they have residence in Denmark, Greenland or Faroe Islands, if they need to transit through Denmark to return to your country of residence (e.g. Swedes to transferring through Denmark to return to Sweden) or have a worthy purpose to transit through Denmark and if they have a worthy purpose for entry. Here is the Ministry’s list of worthy purposes [https://um.dk/en/travel-and-residence/coronavirus-covid-19/]
Note that if you are arriving to Denmark from your private trip from any country, regardless of the status of the country of departure, the duration of your stay, and whether you are a citizen, a resident, or enter with a worthy purpose, you are strongly encouraged to stay home for 14 days, comply with the general guidelines for appropriate behaviour in public spaces during transportation, avoid close contact with other people, and pay extra attention to symptoms of COVID-19.
Note that If you commute to/from work in Denmark from e.g. Sweden or Germany (or vice versa), you will not have to stay at home for 14 days between commutes.
Jakob Haff
fortsæt med at læse
