Title: In_English_Critically_acclaimed_TV-series_'Borgen
Date: 2020-04-29
Article Type: Film og tv
Author: The fourth season of the hit Danish TV-series will be broadcast in 2022 on Danish TV and subsequently on Netflix all around the world.

Simon Løber Roliggaard
Journalist
The award-winning Danish TV-series ’Borgen’ will be back with a fourth season in 2022.
Originally, only three seasons of the political thriller were planned, but the national broadcaster, DR, has decided to revive the hit series.
DR presented the news at a digital press conference Wednesday.
’Borgen’ is one of DR’s most successful TV-series ever, and the first three seasons were aired from 2010 to 2013. The series also attracted considerable attention in Europe and the US and helped catapult its lead actors – Sidse Babett Knudsen, Birgitte Hjort Sørensen, and Pilou Asbæk – into international fame.
In Denmark, ’Borgen’ received some criticism for being too politicizing.
The TV-series nevertheless grabbed a heap of awards in Denmark and abroad, including a BAFTA Award and a Peabody Award. Together with two other Danish popular and critically acclaimed TV-series, ’The Killing’ and ’Unit One’, ’Borgen’ won an honorary Emmy Award in 2016.
Adam Price who is back as the series’ main writer said that the story begins at a point where former prime minister Birgitte Nyborg is now Denmark’s foreign minister in a newly formed government after spending a couple of years in opposition.
»The question is if the post as foreign minister is enough for her. This is a story about power. That’s the main narrative in ’Borgen’. For a person like Nyborg who has been in the centre of everything for so long, power may be a goal in itself. When you have been drinking this slow working poison, which power can also be, will she pursue power for its own sake?«, Adam Price said.
DR’s director-general, Maria Rørbye Rønn, said that she realized at the Emmy Award show in 2016 just how big a thing ’Borgen’ was, not only in Denmark but all over the world.
»’Borgen’ has been shown in almost 150 countries where viewers are now familiar with the characters and know their names. They now have an impression of Danish society and what life is like here. The series has proven to be relevant, not only to Danes, but to people all over the world. The reason for it is that this is a very strong and meaningful narrative«, she said.
’Borgen’ will air on DR first and subsequently be made available to the rest of the world on Netflix.
Translated by: Tonny Pedersen
Simon Løber Roliggaard
fortsæt med at læse
DR's mest populære programmer er i fare
