Title: »I_think_my_penis_would_like_to_tell_me_to_have_more_sex«_-_politiken.dk
Date: 2014-05-14
Article Type: Foto
Author: Som abonnent kan du ubegrænset dele artikler med dine venner og familie. Læs mere om fordelene ved et abonnement her.

I’m quite an open person. It’s easy to talk about how I am feeling, when traditionally men aren’t supposed to. I love my penis. I’m not embarrassed about it, it’s just a bit of skin. When they are flaccid they have that little bit of a jiggle. They don’t look like anything else on the human body. They are a bit silly, aren’t they? You can just fling it around. If you so choose!
When I was a teenager I was worried about being too small. I’ve spoken to women and gay men about size – I was probably drunk when I asked the gay men – and I don’t think size is that big of a deal.
If I let it grow, I have a lot of pubic hair. I prefer to be cleaner. I like cycling, so if I let it grow it can get a bit warm down there. And the other practicality, I suppose, is whenever I’ve given oral sex to a woman, hair can get in your teeth and be a bit less pleasant. I don’t mind if a bit of hair gets in my teeth, but if I can ‘manscape’ and be more presentable for women… I assume it’s what they prefer. I don’t think anyone wants it bald, but if you can show you care, it’s good. At least, it makes me feel better about myself.
I like rock climbing. It’s very adventurous, you have to walk up a cliff face, maybe through a forest. It’s not dangerous, but there is an element of fear and danger. There’s a lot of satisfaction when you get to the top. You have to sort of solve a problem with your body. It’s therapeutic. You can’t think of anything else while you’re doing it. It’s a way to be present. I’m not that present in the rest of my life, there’s a smartphone, I’m juggling different things. When I rock climb it’s just me, no phone signal, and a few mates. It’s serene. Unless you fall, then it’s scary. You don’t get hurt, but it is scary. And you have to pick yourself up, have a biscuit and try again.
Allerede abonnent? Log ind her
