Title: Jan_Grarup_»When_you_see_children_with_a_white_flag_walking_among_shells_and_snipers,_you_understand_how_violent_this_war_is«_-_politiken.dk
Date: 2017-03-01
Article Type: Foto
Author: Som abonnent kan du ubegrænset dele artikler med dine venner og familie. Læs mere om fordelene ved et abonnement her.

»I have covered war zones for more than 20 years – and Mosul is one of the most brutal places I have experienced«.
»You don’t have to be in the area for long before you understand how terrible it is to be in the city during the bombardments that Mosul has seen. It effects all of your senses; and it is a mystery to me how the children, in particular, have managed to survive«.
Jan Grarup has collected some of his most riveting photographs from the besieged city in the video series below. Here he tells the story of the individual photographs, and what it is like to be in Mosul.
Warning: Some of the images contain graphic content.
Since the offensive against IS in Mosul began in October, Jan Grarup has travelled to the city three times. First in November and then in the areas around Mosul where he spent Christmas Eve. Finally, at the beginning of February, he returned to Mosul, which has been the Islamic State stronghold since June 2014.
When he recalls the conditions for the hundreds of thousands of people in the war zone, he returns again and again to the situation for the smallest members of the tormented population.
»I have seen children walk down a road with a white flag in their hand, while shells and sniper fire shower down upon them as they try to get their families to safety. It is these sort of incidents that make you understand just how violent this war is«.
»At the same time, children try to adapt to the situation. I often think how astounding it is. While battles are raging around them, you can still see the children in the streets – beginning to play….«.
Born in 1968. Since he finished his training as a photographer, Jan Grarup has reported from a long list of conflicts around the world, including Somalia, Rwanda, Bosnia, Chechnya, The Central African Republic, Haiti, Gaza, Iraq and Afghanistan.
Jan Grarup has won many international photo competitions during his career, including the most prestigious of them all – the World Press Photo, as well as Denmark’s Press Photo of the Year. Most recently in February he received second prize in the Issue Reporting Picture Story of the reportage category in the American Pictures of the Year International competition for his photographs from Mosul.
Som abonnent kan du ubegrænset dele artikler med dine venner og familie. Læs mere om fordelene ved et abonnement
her
.
