Title: Historien_om_nybyggerne_blev_hvidvasket,_men_ny_fo
Date: 2022-08-21
Article Type: Kultur
Author: THE NEW BLACK WEST78Cowboy Jordan Miller rides in the Black Cowboy Association’s forty-fifth annual parade, which is held in Oakland the first weekend in October. The Black Cowboy Association is a nonprofit organization that, for the past forty years, has striven educate the community of Oakland on the historical contributions of Black cowboys. The parade and festivities held by members of the Buffalo Soldiers of Seattle, Oakland Girl Scouts, and many other local groups starts and ends at De Fremery Park after making its way through West Oakland.black cowboy parade de fremery park, oakland, california, 2019

THE NEW BLACK WEST78Cowboy Jordan Miller rides in the Black Cowboy Association’s forty-fifth annual parade, which is held in Oakland the first weekend in October. The Black Cowboy Association is a nonprofit organization that, for the past forty years, has striven educate the community of Oakland on the historical contributions of Black cowboys. The parade and festivities held by members of the Buffalo Soldiers of Seattle, Oakland Girl Scouts, and many other local groups starts and ends at De Fremery Park after making its way through West Oakland.black cowboy parade de fremery park, oakland, california, 2019 Foto: Gabriela Hasbun/Photograph by Gabriela Hasbun
Her er den moderne cowboy stilig – og sort.
Som abonnent kan du ubegrænset dele artikler med dine venner og familie. Læs mere om fordelene ved et abonnement
her
.
D
en hvide mand som en ensom rytter på sin hest. Det er det arketypiske billede af en cowboy.
Men nu har den amerikanske fotograf
Gabriela Hasbun
i mere end 10 år skildret USA’s eneste rodeo for sorte cowboys og cowgirls med sit kamera.
Billederne er samlet i bogen ’The New Black West’, og her er helt andre billeder af cowboys end dem, vi plejer at se.
Rodeoet, som hedder The Bill Pickett Invitational Rodeo, er en omrejsende turnering, der slår sig op på at være et levende vidnesbyrd om de sortes historie i det vilde vesten.
Allerede abonnent? Log ind her
