Title: Forskning_i_verdensklasse_Tre_danske_gennembrud_er_pa_top-10_listen_over_de_største_opdagelser_i_2022_-_politiken.dk
Date: 2022-12-20
Article Type: Viden
Author: NASA’s Webb Sheds Light on Galaxy Evolution, Black Holes
Galactic high five!

 In the James Webb Space Telescope’s image of Stephan’s Quintet, we see 5 galaxies, 4 of which interact. (The left galaxy is actually much closer to us than the rest of the group!) These colliding galaxies are pulling and stretching each other in a gravitational dance. Webb will revolutionize our knowledge of star formation and gas interactions within: nasa.gov/webbfirstimages/

 This mosaic, a composite of near and mid-infrared data, is Webb’s largest image to date, covering an area of the sky 1/5 of the Moon’s diameter (as seen from Earth). It contains more than 150 million pixels and is constructed from about 1,000 image files.

 Image Description: A group of five galaxies that appear close to each other in the sky: two in the middle, one toward the top, one to the upper left, and one toward the bottom. Four of the five appear to be touching. One is somewhat separated. In the image, the galaxies are large relative to the hundreds of much smaller (more distant) galaxies in the background. All five galaxies have bright white cores. Each has a slightly different size, shape, structure, and coloring. Scattered across the image, in front of the galaxies are number of foreground stars with diffraction spikes: bright white points, each with eight bright lines radiating out from the center.

NASA’s Webb Sheds Light on Galaxy Evolution, Black Holes
Galactic high five!

 In the James Webb Space Telescope’s image of Stephan’s Quintet, we see 5 galaxies, 4 of which interact. (The left galaxy is actually much closer to us than the rest of the group!) These colliding galaxies are pulling and stretching each other in a gravitational dance. Webb will revolutionize our knowledge of star formation and gas interactions within: nasa.gov/webbfirstimages/

 This mosaic, a composite of near and mid-infrared data, is Webb’s largest image to date, covering an area of the sky 1/5 of the Moon’s diameter (as seen from Earth). It contains more than 150 million pixels and is constructed from about 1,000 image files.

 Image Description: A group of five galaxies that appear close to each other in the sky: two in the middle, one toward the top, one to the upper left, and one toward the bottom. Four of the five appear to be touching. One is somewhat separated. In the image, the galaxies are large relative to the hundreds of much smaller (more distant) galaxies in the background. All five galaxies have bright white cores. Each has a slightly different size, shape, structure, and coloring. Scattered across the image, in front of the galaxies are number of foreground stars with diffraction spikes: bright white points, each with eight bright lines radiating out from the center. Foto: NASA, ESA, CSA, and STScI
Et af verdens førende tidsskrifter Science har kåret de ti største gennembrud i 2022, hvor det guldbelagte superteleskop James Webb løber med førstepladsen. Tre danske opdagelser er med på listen.
Som abonnent kan du ubegrænset dele artikler med dine venner og familie. Læs mere om fordelene ved et abonnement
her
.
11. juli i år i en live-udsendelse fra Det Hvide Hus afslørede den amerikanske præsident, Joe Biden, det første billede fra, hvad han kaldte »et mirakuløst nyt rumteleskop«.
Billedet, som er døbt ’First Deep Field’, var taget med verdens nye rumteleskop, James Webb, med det infrarøde kamera. Det er det dybeste og skarpeste kig, man nogensinde har fået af universet, hvor man blandt andet kan se stjerner og galakser i deres barndom mindre end en milliard år efter, at universet blev undfanget af Big Bang.
Hvad den amerikanske præsident næppe vidste, var, at det var den danske astronom Klaus Pontoppidan, der på en mørk aften i sin villa i Baltimore hentede billedet ned på sin bærbare computer fra det spritnye og guldbelagte superteleskop. Han blev dermed den første på planeten Jorden, der fik et blik ind i en 13 milliarder år gammel verden.
Efter at teleskopet har været under konstruktion i 20 år, befinder det sig nu, hvor det skal være: halvanden million kilometer borte i skyggen fra Jorden. På den plads skal rumteleskopet med sine infrarøde øjne gøre os klogere på alt fra universets barndom til karakterisering af planeter, som kredser rundt om andre stjerner end Solen i vores galakse, Mælkevejen, hvor der måske findes de rette betingelser for liv.
Allerede abonnent? Log ind her
