Title: Zentropa_producer_Peter_Aalbæk_is_»not_familiar_with«_new_rules_against_harassment
Date: 2018-05-08
Article Type: Kultur
Author: Lea Wind-Friis

Europæisk klimakorrespondent
Camilla Stockmann
Kulturjournalist
The Danish film company Zentropa last month completed work on a new set of ethical guidelines after revelations last fall that several current and former employees had been exposed to bullying or sexual harassment.
But producer, co-owner and former CEO of Zentropa, Peter Aalbæk Jensen,
who was the target of the accusations and confirmed that most of them were true
, has not read the company’s new guidelines on proper workplace behavior.
»I’m not familiar with them«, Mr. Aalbæk Jensen said.
Zentropa
In November 2017, nine former Zentropa employees exposed
a system
of
degradation and sexual harassment
.
For over twenty years the film company
Zentropa has dominated the Danish film culture
, owing to its size, creativity and cinematic innovation. One of the largest film production companies in Scandinavia, Zentropa has been honoured with some of the most prestigious awards from Cannes, Berlin and Hollywood.
In
detailed testimonials
, nine women have told their stories to Politiken
,
and the information has been
confirmed by a number of other former employees’ observations, experiences and accounts
.
All the former employees have worked in the Film City in Avedøre and worked under
founder and former CEO, Peter Aalbæk Jensen
- longtime Lars von Trier collaborator - who is highlighted by as the main figure perpetuating the system of degradation.
Former employees have told Politiken about their experiences with then-CEO Peter Aalbæk Jensen: He would grope their breasts time and again. Get close and start moaning while they were on the phone. Ask them to
lie across the table or his knee and get spanked
as a punishment.
According to the women’s testimonials, Peter Aalbæk Jensen arranged several sexually degrading acts on stage at the company Christmas party in front of guests from the film industry. Awards were handed out to
the trainee who undressed the fastest and the one with the longest pubic hair
, which would be measured on stage in front of the audience. He organized a game where female employees and trainees took turns pulling out sex toys from a bag, after which he would make suggestions as to their uses. He sent young female trainees out to fetch nipple clamps or demanded that they vaccinate his pigs.
Peter Aalbæk Jensen is
working at Zentropa as producer
. He is member of the board and shares an ownership of 25 percent of the company with director Lars von Trier.
The guidelines stress that »bullying and harassment« are »unacceptable« and that workplace communication should be »outspoken, but never condescending«.
»I’ve never been interested in Boy Scout rules, not when I was CEO of the company and not now«, Mr. Aalbæk Jensen - who stepped down as CEO 2016 - said.
In November, 9 women, all former Zentropa employees, told Politiken that they had been bullied, humiliated and sexually harassed in the workplace. Several of the women later left the film industry because of their experiences.
When the Danish Working Environment Authority visited Zentropa later in November and December, it did not find anything to criticize during the actual inspections. But in its report, which was finalized in January, the authority wrote that »until shortly before the Danish Working Environment began its inquiry into the mental working environment, offensive acts were taking place, acts that we would characterize as bullying, including sexual harassment«.
Asked whether he is the target of the specific cases involving current employees, Mr. Aalbæk Jensen said:
»Absolutely. I know that I’m guilty and that I have been guilty for about 25 years, with my fondness for butt-slapping. And it was delightful until the second I was told to give it up«.
Mr. Aalbæk Jensen has been ordered not to spank interns and refrain from giving them assignments.
Asked whether he intends to continue doing those two things, he said:
»Then I would be disobeying the company’s management«.
Do you disobey the company’s management?
»About 30 times a day«.
Mr. Aalbæk Jensens finds it both »boring and petit bourgeois« that he is no longer allowed to spank employees.
Zentropa’s CEO, Anders Kjærhauge, has a different view of Mr. Aalbæk Jensen’s knowledge of the new guidelines.
»He is familiar with them. At least, he knows the general principles«.
In the Danish Working Environment Authority’s report from January it is mentioned that Zentropa was supposed to do a series of talks with Mr. Aalbæk Jensen about the new guidelines.
This is also denied by Mr. Aalbæk Jensen who told Politiken:
»There hasn’t been any activities that I would describe as a series of talks«
Mr. Kjærhauge, however, maintains that the talks have been held:
»We have talked about the things that needed to be talked about. Now, we want to make some films and focus on celebrating Lars (von Trier) in Cannes. That’s what we’re supposed to do«.
Peter Aalbæk Jensen steppped down as CEO in 2016. He is still working at Zentropa as producer. He is member of the board and shares an ownership of 25 percent of the company with director Lars von Trier.
Camilla Stockmann
fortsæt med at læse
Peter Aalbæk kender ikke Zentropas nye etiske regler - og afviser at følge dem
Peter Aalbæk: »Jeg angrer ikke og reflekterer ikke over det«
